Chapter I: Political Ideals


In dark days, men need a clear faith and a well-grounded hope; and as
the outcome of these, the calm courage which takes no account of
hardships by the way.  The times through which we are passing have
afforded to many of us a confirmation of our faith.  We see that the
things we had thought evil are really evil, and we know more
definitely than we ever did before the directions in which men must
move if a better world is to arise on the ruins of the one which is
now hurling itself into destruction.  We see that men's political
dealings with one another are based on wholly wrong ideals, and can
only be saved by quite different ideals from continuing to be a source
of suffering, devastation, and sin.

Political ideals must be based upon ideals for the individual life.
The aim of politics should be to make the lives of individuals as good
as possible.  There is nothing for the politician to consider outside
or above the various men, women, and children who compose the world.
The problem of politics is to adjust the relations of human beings in
such a way that each severally may have as much of good in his
existence as possible.  And this problem requires that we should first
consider what it is that we think good in the individual life.

To begin with, we do not want all men to be alike.  We do not want to
lay down a pattern or type to which men of all sorts are to be made by
some means or another to approximate.  This is the ideal of the
impatient administrator.  A bad teacher will aim at imposing his
opinion, and turning out a set of pupils all of whom will give the
same definite answer on a doubtful point.  Mr. Bernard Shaw is said to
hold that Troilus and Cressida is the best of Shakespeare's plays.
Although I disagree with this opinion, I should welcome it in a pupil
as a sign of individuality; but most teachers would not tolerate such
a heterodox view.  Not only teachers, but all commonplace persons in
authority, desire in their subordinates that kind of uniformity which
makes their actions easily predictable and never inconvenient.  The
result is that they crush initiative and individuality when they can,
and when they cannot, they quarrel with it.

It is not one ideal for all men, but a separate ideal for each
separate man, that has to be realized if possible.  Every man has it
in his being to develop into something good or bad: there is a best
possible for him, and a worst possible.  His circumstances will
determine whether his capacities for good are developed or crushed,
and whether his bad impulses are strengthened or gradually diverted
into better channels.

But although we cannot set up in any detail an ideal of character
which is to be universally applicable--although we cannot say, for
instance, that all men ought to be industrious, or self-sacrificing,
or fond of music--there are some broad principles which can be used to
guide our estimates as to what is possible or desirable.

We may distinguish two sorts of goods, and two corresponding sorts of
impulses.  There are goods in regard to which individual possession is
possible, and there are goods in which all can share alike.  The food
and clothing of one man is not the food and clothing of another; if
the supply is insufficient, what one man has is obtained at the
expense of some other man.  This applies to material goods generally,
and therefore to the greater part of the present economic life of the
world.  On the other hand, mental and spiritual goods do not belong to
one man to the exclusion of another.  If one man knows a science, that
does not prevent others from knowing it; on the contrary, it helps
them to acquire the knowledge.  If one man is a great artist or poet,
that does not prevent others from painting pictures or writing poems,
but helps to create the atmosphere in which such things are possible.
If one man is full of good-will toward others, that does not mean that
there is less good-will to be shared among the rest; the more
good-will one man has, the more he is likely to create among others.
In such matters there is no possession, because there is not a
definite amount to be shared; any increase anywhere tends to produce
an increase everywhere.

There are two kinds of impulses, corresponding to the two kinds of
goods.  There are possessive impulses, which aim at acquiring or
retaining private goods that cannot be shared; these center in the
impulse of property.  And there are creative or constructive impulses,
which aim at bringing into the world or making available for use the
kind of goods in which there is no privacy and no possession.

The best life is the one in which the creative impulses play the
largest part and the possessive impulses the smallest.  This is no new
discovery.  The Gospel says: "Take no thought, saying, What shall we
eat? or What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?"
The thought we give to these things is taken away from matters of more
importance.  And what is worse, the habit of mind engendered by
thinking of these things is a bad one; it leads to competition, envy,
domination, cruelty, and almost all the moral evils that infest the
world.  In particular, it leads to the predatory use of force.
Material possessions can be taken by force and enjoyed by the robber.
Spiritual possessions cannot be taken in this way.  You may kill an
artist or a thinker, but you cannot acquire his art or his thought.
You may put a man to death because he loves his fellow-men, but you
will not by so doing acquire the love which made his happiness.  Force
is impotent in such matters; it is only as regards material goods that
it is effective.  For this reason the men who believe in force are the
men whose thoughts and desires are preoccupied with material goods.

The possessive impulses, when they are strong, infect activities which
ought to be purely creative.  A man who has made some valuable
discovery may be filled with jealousy of a rival discoverer.  If one
man has found a cure for cancer and another has found a cure for
consumption, one of them may be delighted if the other man's discovery
turns out a mistake, instead of regretting the suffering of patients
which would otherwise have been avoided.  In such cases, instead of
desiring knowledge for its own sake, or for the sake of its
usefulness, a man is desiring it as a means to reputation.  Every
creative impulse is shadowed by a possessive impulse; even the
aspirant to saintliness may be jealous of the more successful saint.
Most affection is accompanied by some tinge of jealousy, which is a
possessive impulse intruding into the creative region.  Worst of all,
in this direction, is the sheer envy of those who have missed
everything worth having in life, and who are instinctively bent on
preventing others from enjoying what they have not had.  There is
often much of this in the attitude of the old toward the young.

There is in human beings, as in plants and animals, a certain natural
impulse of growth, and this is just as true of mental as of physical
development.  Physical development is helped by air and nourishment
and exercise, and may be hindered by the sort of treatment which made
Chinese women's feet small.  In just the same way mental development
may be helped or hindered by outside influences.  The outside
influences that help are those that merely provide encouragement or
mental food or opportunities for exercising mental faculties.  The
influences that hinder are those that interfere with growth by
applying any kind of force, whether discipline or authority or fear or
the tyranny of public opinion or the necessity of engaging in some
totally incongenial occupation.  Worst of all influences are those
that thwart or twist a man's fundamental impulse, which is what shows
itself as conscience in the moral sphere; such influences are likely
to do a man an inward danger from which he will never recover.

Those who realize the harm that can be done to others by any use of
force against them, and the worthlessness of the goods that can be
acquired by force, will be very full of respect for the liberty of
others; they will not try to bind them or fetter them; they will be
slow to judge and swift to sympathize; they will treat every human
being with a kind of tenderness, because the principle of good in him
is at once fragile and infinitely precious.  They will not condemn
those who are unlike themselves; they will know and feel that
individuality brings differences and uniformity means death.  They
will wish each human being to be as much a living thing and as little
a mechanical product as it is possible to be; they will cherish in
each one just those things which the harsh usage of a ruthless world
would destroy.  In one word, all their dealings with others will be
inspired by a deep impulse of reverence.

What we shall desire for individuals is now clear: strong creative
impulses, overpowering and absorbing the instinct of possession;
reverence for others; respect for the fundamental creative impulse in
ourselves.  A certain kind of self-respect or native pride is
necessary to a good life; a man must not have a sense of utter inward
defeat if he is to remain whole, but must feel the courage and the
hope and the will to live by the best that is in him, whatever outward
or inward obstacles it may encounter.  So far as it lies in a man's
own power, his life will realize its best possibilities if it has
three things: creative rather than possessive impulses, reverence for
others, and respect for the fundamental impulse in himself.

Political and social institutions are to be judged by the good or harm
that they do to individuals.  Do they encourage creativeness rather
than possessiveness?  Do they embody or promote a spirit of reverence
between human beings?  Do they preserve self-respect?

In all these ways the institutions under which we live are very far
indeed from what they ought to be.

Institutions, and especially economic systems, have a profound
influence in molding the characters of men and women.  They may
encourage adventure and hope, or timidity and the pursuit of safety.
They may open men's minds to great possibilities, or close them
against everything but the risk of obscure misfortune.  They may make
a man's happiness depend upon what he adds to the general possessions
of the world, or upon what he can secure for himself of the private
goods in which others cannot share.  Modern capitalism forces the
wrong decision of these alternatives upon all who are not heroic or
exceptionally fortunate.

Men's impulses are molded, partly by their native disposition, partly
by opportunity and environment, especially early environment.  Direct
preaching can do very little to change impulses, though it can lead
people to restrain the direct expression of them, often with the
result that the impulses go underground and come to the surface again
in some contorted form.  When we have discovered what kinds of impulse
we desire, we must not rest content with preaching, or with trying to
produce the outward manifestation without the inner spring; we must
try rather to alter institutions in the way that will, of itself,
modify the life of impulse in the desired direction.

At present our institutions rest upon two things: property and power.
Both of these are very unjustly distributed; both, in the actual
world, are of great importance to the happiness of the individual.
Both are possessive goods; yet without them many of the goods in which
all might share are hard to acquire as things are now.

Without property, as things are, a man has no freedom, and no security
for the necessities of a tolerable life; without power, he has no
opportunity for initiative.  If men are to have free play for their
creative impulses, they must be liberated from sordid cares by a
certain measure of security, and they must have a sufficient share of
power to be able to exercise initiative as regards the course and
conditions of their lives.

Few men can succeed in being creative rather than possessive in a
world which is wholly built on competition, where the great majority
would fall into utter destitution if they became careless as to the
acquisition of material goods, where honor and power and respect are
given to wealth rather than to wisdom, where the law embodies and
consecrates the injustice of those who have toward those who have not.
In such an environment even those whom nature has endowed with great
creative gifts become infected with the poison of competition.  Men
combine in groups to attain more strength in the scramble for material
goods, and loyalty to the group spreads a halo of quasi-idealism round
the central impulse of greed.  Trade-unions and the Labor party are no
more exempt from this vice than other parties and other sections of
society; though they are largely inspired by the hope of a radically
better world.  They are too often led astray by the immediate object
of securing for themselves a large share of material goods.  That this
desire is in accordance with justice, it is impossible to deny; but
something larger and more constructive is needed as a political ideal,
if the victors of to-morrow are not to become the oppressors of the
day after.  The inspiration and outcome of a reforming movement ought
to be freedom and a generous spirit, not niggling restrictions and
regulations.

The present economic system concentrates initiative in the hands of a
small number of very rich men.  Those who are not capitalists have,
almost always, very little choice as to their activities when once
they have selected a trade or profession; they are not part of the
power that moves the mechanism, but only a passive portion of the
machinery.  Despite political democracy, there is still an
extraordinary degree of difference in the power of self-direction
belonging to a capitalist and to a man who has to earn his living.
Economic affairs touch men's lives, at most times, much more
intimately than political questions.  At present the man who has no
capital usually has to sell himself to some large organization, such
as a railway company, for example.  He has no voice in its management,
and no liberty in politics except what his trade-union can secure for
him.  If he happens to desire a form of liberty which is not thought
important by his trade-union, he is powerless; he must submit or
starve.

Exactly the same thing happens to professional men.  Probably a
majority of journalists are engaged in writing for newspapers whose
politics they disagree with; only a man of wealth can own a large
newspaper, and only an accident can enable the point of view or the
interests of those who are not wealthy to find expression in a
newspaper.  A large part of the best brains of the country are in the
civil service, where the condition of their employment is silence
about the evils which cannot be concealed from them.  A Nonconformist
minister loses his livelihood if his views displease his congregation;
a member of Parliament loses his seat if he is not sufficiently supple
or sufficiently stupid to follow or share all the turns and twists of
public opinion.  In every walk of life, independence of mind is
punished by failure, more and more as economic organizations grow
larger and more rigid.  Is it surprising that men become increasingly
docile, increasingly ready to submit to dictation and to forego the
right of thinking for themselves?  Yet along such lines civilization
can only sink into a Byzantine immobility.

Fear of destitution is not a motive out of which a free creative life
can grow, yet it is the chief motive which inspires the daily work of
most wage-earners.  The hope of possessing more wealth and power than
any man ought to have, which is the corresponding motive of the rich,
is quite as bad in its effects; it compels men to close their minds
against justice, and to prevent themselves from thinking honestly on
social questions while in the depths of their hearts they uneasily
feel that their pleasures are bought by the miseries of others.  The
injustices of destitution and wealth alike ought to be rendered
impossible.  Then a great fear would be removed from the lives of the
many, and hope would have to take on a better form in the lives of the
few.

But security and liberty are only the negative conditions for good
political institutions.  When they have been won, we need also the
positive condition: encouragement of creative energy.  Security alone
might produce a smug and stationary society; it demands creativeness
as its counterpart, in order to keep alive the adventure and interest
of life, and the movement toward perpetually new and better things.
There can be no final goal for human institutions; the best are those
that most encourage progress toward others still better.  Without
effort and change, human life cannot remain good.  It is not a
finished Utopia that we ought to desire, but a world where imagination
and hope are alive and active.

It is a sad evidence of the weariness mankind has suffered from
excessive toil that his heavens have usually been places where nothing
ever happened or changed.  Fatigue produces the illusion that only
rest is needed for happiness; but when men have rested for a time,
boredom drives them to renewed activity.  For this reason, a happy
life must be one in which there is activity.  If it is also to be a
useful life, the activity ought to be as far as possible creative, not
merely predatory or defensive.  But creative activity requires
imagination and originality, which are apt to be subversive of the
status quo.  At present, those who have power dread a disturbance of
the status quo, lest their unjust privileges should be taken away.
In combination with the instinct for conventionality,[1] which man
shares with the other gregarious animals, those who profit by the
existing order have established a system which punishes originality
and starves imagination from the moment of first going to school down
to the time of death and burial.  The whole spirit in which education
is conducted needs to be changed, in order that children may be
encouraged to think and feel for themselves, not to acquiesce
passively in the thoughts and feelings of others.  It is not rewards
after the event that will produce initiative, but a certain mental
atmosphere.  There have been times when such an atmosphere existed:
the great days of Greece, and Elizabethan England, may serve as
examples.  But in our own day the tyranny of vast machine-like
organizations, governed from above by men who know and care little for
the lives of those whom they control, is killing individuality and
freedom of mind, and forcing men more and more to conform to a uniform
pattern.

[1] In England this is called "a sense of humor."

Vast organizations are an inevitable element in modern life, and it is
useless to aim at their abolition, as has been done by some reformers,
for instance, William Morris.  It is true that they make the
preservation of individuality more difficult, but what is needed is a
way of combining them with the greatest possible scope for individual
initiative.

One very important step toward this end would be to render democratic
the government of every organization.  At present, our legislative
institutions are more or less democratic, except for the important
fact that women are excluded.  But our administration is still purely
bureaucratic, and our economic organizations are monarchical or
oligarchic.  Every limited liability company is run by a small number
of self-appointed or coöpted directors.  There can be no real
freedom or democracy until the men who do the work in a business also
control its management.

Another measure which would do much to increase liberty would be an
increase of self-government for subordinate groups, whether
geographical or economic or defined by some common belief, like
religious sects.  A modern state is so vast and its machinery is so
little understood that even when a man has a vote he does not feel
himself any effective part of the force which determines its policy.
Except in matters where he can act in conjunction with an
exceptionally powerful group, he feels himself almost impotent, and
the government remains a remote impersonal circumstance, which must be
simply endured, like the weather.  By a share in the control of
smaller bodies, a man might regain some of that sense of personal
opportunity and responsibility which belonged to the citizen of a
city-state in ancient Greece or medieval Italy.

When any group of men has a strong corporate consciousness--such as
belongs, for example, to a nation or a trade or a religious
body--liberty demands that it should be free to decide for itself all
matters which are of great importance to the outside world.  This is
the basis of the universal claim for national independence.  But
nations are by no means the only groups which ought to have
self-government for their internal concerns.  And nations, like other
groups, ought not to have complete liberty of action in matters which
are of equal concern to foreign nations.  Liberty demands
self-government, but not the right to interfere with others.  The
greatest degree of liberty is not secured by anarchy.  The
reconciliation of liberty with government is a difficult problem, but
it is one which any political theory must face.

The essence of government is the use of force in accordance with law
to secure certain ends which the holders of power consider desirable.
The coercion of an individual or a group by force is always in itself
more or less harmful.  But if there were no government, the result
would not be an absence of force in men's relations to each other; it
would merely be the exercise of force by those who had strong
predatory instincts, necessitating either slavery or a perpetual
readiness to repel force with force on the part of those whose
instincts were less violent.  This is the state of affairs at present
in international relations, owing to the fact that no international
government exists.  The results of anarchy between states should
suffice to persuade us that anarchism has no solution to offer for the
evils of the world.

There is probably one purpose, and only one, for which the use of
force by a government is beneficent, and that is to diminish the total
amount of force used m the world.  It is clear, for example, that the
legal prohibition of murder diminishes the total amount of violence in
the world.  And no one would maintain that parents should have
unlimited freedom to ill-treat their children.  So long as some men
wish to do violence to others, there cannot be complete liberty, for
either the wish to do violence must be restrained, or the victims must
be left to suffer.  For this reason, although individuals and
societies should have the utmost freedom as regards their own affairs,
they ought not to have complete freedom as regards their dealings with
others.  To give freedom to the strong to oppress the weak is not the
way to secure the greatest possible amount of freedom in the world.
This is the basis of the socialist revolt against the kind of freedom
which used to be advocated by laissez-faire economists.

Democracy is a device--the best so far invented--for diminishing as
much as possible the interference of governments with liberty.  If a
nation is divided into two sections which cannot both have their way,
democracy theoretically insures that the majority shall have their
way.  But democracy is not at all an adequate device unless it is
accompanied by a very great amount of devolution.  Love of uniformity,
or the mere pleasure of interfering, or dislike of differing tastes
and temperaments, may often lead a majority to control a minority in
matters which do not really concern the majority.  We should none of
us like to have the internal affairs of Great Britain settled by a
parliament of the world, if ever such a body came into existence.
Nevertheless, there are matters which such a body could settle much
better than any existing instrument of government.

The theory of the legitimate use of force in human affairs, where a
government exists, seems clear.  Force should only be used against
those who attempt to use force against others, or against those who
will not respect the law in cases where a common decision is necessary
and a minority are opposed to the action of the majority.  These seem
legitimate occasions for the use of force; and they should be
legitimate occasions in international affairs, if an international
government existed.  The problem of the legitimate occasions for the
use of force in the absence of a government is a different one, with
which we are not at present concerned.

Although a government must have the power to use force, and may on
occasion use it legitimately, the aim of the reformers to have such
institutions as will diminish the need for actual coercion will be
found to have this effect.  Most of us abstain, for instance, from
theft, not because it is illegal, but because we feel no desire to
steal.  The more men learn to live creatively rather than
possessively, the less their wishes will lead them to thwart others or
to attempt violent interference with their liberty.  Most of the
conflicts of interests, which lead individuals or organizations into
disputes, are purely imaginary, and would be seen to be so if men
aimed more at the goods in which all can share, and less at those
private possessions that are the source of strife.  In proportion as
men live creatively, they cease to wish to interfere with others by
force.  Very many matters in which, at present, common action is
thought indispensable, might well be left to individual decision.  It
used to be thought absolutely necessary that all the inhabitants of a
country should have the same religion, but we now know that there is
no such necessity.  In like manner it will be found, as men grow more
tolerant in their instincts, that many uniformities now insisted upon
are useless and even harmful.

Good political institutions would weaken the impulse toward force and
domination in two ways: first, by increasing the opportunities for the
creative impulses, and by shaping education so as to strengthen these
impulses; secondly, by diminishing the outlets for the possessive
instincts.  The diffusion of power, both in the political and the
economic sphere, instead of its concentration in the hands of
officials and captains of industry, would greatly diminish the
opportunities for acquiring the habit of command, out of which the
desire for exercising tyranny is apt to spring.  Autonomy, both for
districts and for organizations, would leave fewer occasions when
governments were called upon to make decisions as to other people's
concerns.  And the abolition of capitalism and the wage system would
remove the chief incentive to fear and greed, those correlative
passions by which all free life is choked and gagged.

Few men seem to realize how many of the evils from which we suffer are
wholly unnecessary, and that they could be abolished by a united
effort within a few years.  If a majority in every civilized country
so desired, we could, within twenty years, abolish all abject poverty,
quite half the illness in the world, the whole economic slavery which
binds down nine tenths of our population; we could fill the world with
beauty and joy, and secure the reign of universal peace.  It is only
because men are apathetic that this is not achieved, only because
imagination is sluggish, and what always has been is regarded as what
always must be.  With good-will, generosity, intelligence, these
things could be brought about.




Chapter II: Capitalism and the Wage System


I

The world is full of preventible evils which most men would be glad to
see prevented.

Nevertheless, these evils persist, and nothing effective is done
toward abolishing them.

This paradox produces astonishment in inexperienced reformers, and too
often produces disillusionment in those who have come to know the
difficulty of changing human institutions.

War is recognized as an evil by an immense majority in every civilized
country; but this recognition does not prevent war.

The unjust distribution of wealth must be obviously an evil to those
who are not prosperous, and they are nine tenths of the population.
Nevertheless it continues unabated.

The tyranny of the holders of power is a source of needless suffering
and misfortune to very large sections of mankind; but power remains in
few hands, and tends, if anything, to grow more concentrated.

I wish first to study the evils of our present institutions, and the
causes of the very limited success of reformers in the past, and then
to suggest reasons for the hope of a more lasting and permanent
success in the near future.

The war has come as a challenge to all who desire a better world.  The
system which cannot save mankind from such an appalling disaster is at
fault somewhere, and cannot be amended in any lasting way unless the
danger of great wars in the future can be made very small.

But war is only the final flower of an evil tree.  Even in times of
peace, most men live lives of monotonous labor, most women are
condemned to a drudgery which almost kills the possibility of
happiness before youth is past, most children are allowed to grow up
in ignorance of all that would enlarge their thoughts or stimulate
their imagination.  The few who are more fortunate are rendered
illiberal by their unjust privileges, and oppressive through fear of
the awakening indignation of the masses.  From the highest to the
lowest, almost all men are absorbed in the economic struggle: the
struggle to acquire what is their due or to retain what is not their
due.  Material possessions, in fact or in desire, dominate our
outlook, usually to the exclusion of all generous and creative
impulses.  Possessiveness--the passion to have and to hold--is the
ultimate source of war, and the foundation of all the ills from which
the political world is suffering.  Only by diminishing the strength of
this passion and its hold upon our daily lives can new institutions
bring permanent benefit to mankind.

Institutions which will diminish the sway of greed are possible, but
only through a complete reconstruction of our whole economic system.
Capitalism and the wage system must be abolished; they are twin
monsters which are eating up the life of the world.  In place of them
we need a system which will hold in cheek men's predatory impulses,
and will diminish the economic injustice that allows some to be rich
in idleness while others are poor in spite of unremitting labor; but
above all we need a system which will destroy the tyranny of the
employer, by making men at the same time secure against destitution
and able to find scope for individual initiative in the control of the
industry by which they live.  A better system can do all these things,
and can be established by the democracy whenever it grows weary of
enduring evils which there is no reason to endure.

We may distinguish four purposes at which an economic system may aim:
first, it may aim at the greatest possible production of goods and at
facilitating technical progress; second, it may aim at securing
distributive justice; third, it may aim at giving security against
destitution; and, fourth, it may aim at liberating creative impulses
and diminishing possessive impulses.

Of these four purposes the last is the most important.  Security is
chiefly important as a means to it.  State socialism, though it might
give material security and more justice than we have at present, would
probably fail to liberate creative impulses or produce a progressive
society.

Our present system fails in all four purposes.  It is chiefly defended
on the ground that it achieves the first of the four purposes, namely,
the greatest possible production of material goods, but it only does
this in a very short-sighted way, by methods which are wasteful in the
long run both of human material and of natural resources.

Capitalistic enterprise involves a ruthless belief in the importance
of increasing material production to the utmost possible extent now
and in the immediate future.  In obedience to this belief, new
portions of the earth's surface are continually brought under the sway
of industrialism.  Vast tracts of Africa become recruiting grounds for
the labor required in the gold and diamond mines of the Rand,
Rhodesia, and Kimberley; for this purpose, the population is
demoralized, taxed, driven into revolt, and exposed to the
contamination of European vice and disease.  Healthy and vigorous
races from Southern Europe are tempted to America, where sweating and
slum life reduce their vitality if they do not actually cause their
death.  What damage is done to our own urban populations by the
conditions under which they live, we all know.  And what is true of
the human riches of the world is no less true of the physical
resources.  The mines, forests, and wheat-fields of the world are all
being exploited at a rate which must practically exhaust them at no
distant date.  On the side of material production, the world is living
too fast; in a kind of delirium, almost all the energy of the world
has rushed into the immediate production of something, no matter what,
and no matter at what cost.  And yet our present system is defended on
the ground that it safeguards progress!

It cannot be said that our present economic system is any more
successful in regard to the other three objects which ought to be
aimed at.  Among the many obvious evils of capitalism and the wage
system, none are more glaring than that they encourage predatory
instincts, that they allow economic injustice, and that they give
great scope to the tyranny of the employer.

As to predatory instincts, we may say, broadly speaking, that in a
state of nature there would be two ways of acquiring riches--one by
production, the other by robbery.  Under our existing system, although
what is recognized as robbery is forbidden, there are nevertheless
many ways of becoming rich without contributing anything to the wealth
of the community.  Ownership of land or capital, whether acquired or
inherited, gives a legal right to a permanent income.  Although most
people have to produce in order to live, a privileged minority are
able to live in luxury without producing anything at all.  As these
are the men who are not only the most fortunate but also the most
respected, there is a general desire to enter their ranks, and a
widespread unwillingness to face the fact that there is no
justification whatever for incomes derived in this way.  And apart
from the passive enjoyment of rent or interest, the methods of
acquiring wealth are very largely predatory.  It is not, as a rule, by
means of useful inventions, or of any other action which increases the
general wealth of the community, that men amass fortunes; it is much
more often by skill in exploiting or circumventing others.  Nor is it
only among the rich that our present régime promotes a narrowly
acquisitive spirit.  The constant risk of destitution compels most men
to fill a great part of their time and thought with the economic
struggle.  There is a theory that this increases the total output of
wealth by the community.  But for reasons to which I shall return
later, I believe this theory to be wholly mistaken.

Economic injustice is perhaps the most obvious evil of our present
system.  It would be utterly absurd to maintain that the men who
inherit great wealth deserve better of the community than those who
have to work for their living.  I am not prepared to maintain that
economic justice requires an exactly equal income for everybody.  Some
kinds of work require a larger income for efficiency than others do;
but there is economic injustice as soon as a man has more than his
share, unless it is because his efficiency in his work requires it, or
as a reward for some definite service.  But this point is so obvious
that it needs no elaboration.

The modern growth of monopolies in the shape of trusts, cartels,
federations of employers and so on has greatly increased the power of
the capitalist to levy toll on the community.  This tendency will not
cease of itself, but only through definite action on the part of those
who do not profit by the capitalist régime.  Unfortunately the
distinction between the proletariat and the capitalist is not so sharp
as it was in the minds of socialist theorizers.  Trade-unions have
funds in various securities; friendly societies are large capitalists;
and many individuals eke out their wages by invested savings.  All
this increases the difficulty of any clear-cut radical change in our
economic system.  But it does not diminish the desirability of such a
change.

Such a system as that suggested by the French syndicalists, in which
each trade would be self-governing and completely independent, without
the control of any central authority, would not secure economic
justice.  Some trades are in a much stronger bargaining position than
others.  Coal and transport, for example, could paralyze the national
life, and could levy blackmail by threatening to do so.  On the other
hand, such people as school teachers, for example, could rouse very
little terror by the threat of a strike and would be in a very weak
bargaining position.  Justice can never be secured by any system of
unrestrained force exercised by interested parties in their own
interests.  For this reason the abolition of the state, which the
syndicalists seem to desire, would be a measure not compatible with
economic justice.

The tyranny of the employer, which at present robs the greater part of
most men's lives of all liberty and all initiative, is unavoidable so
long as the employer retains the right of dismissal with consequent
loss of pay.  This right is supposed to be essential in order that men
may have an incentive to work thoroughly.  But as men grow more
civilized, incentives based on hope become increasingly preferable to
those that are based on fear.  It would be far better that men should
be rewarded for working well than that they should be punished for
working badly.  This system is already in operation in the civil
service, where a man is only dismissed for some exceptional degree of
vice or virtue, such as murder or illegal abstention from it.
Sufficient pay to ensure a livelihood ought to be given to every
person who is willing to work, independently of the question whether
the particular work at which he is skilled is wanted at the moment or
not.  If it is not wanted, some new trade which is wanted ought to be
taught at the public expense.  Why, for example, should a hansom-cab
driver be allowed to suffer on account of the introduction of taxies?
He has not committed any crime, and the fact that his work is no
longer wanted is due to causes entirely outside his control.  Instead
of being allowed to starve, he ought to be given instruction in motor
driving or in whatever other trade may seem most suitable.  At
present, owing to the fact that all industrial changes tend to cause
hardships to some section of wage-earners, there is a tendency to
technical conservatism on the part of labor, a dislike of innovations,
new processes, and new methods.  But such changes, if they are in the
permanent interest of the community, ought to be carried out without
allowing them to bring unmerited loss to those sections of the
community whose labor is no longer wanted in the old form.  The
instinctive conservatism of mankind is sure to make all processes of
production change more slowly than they should.  It is a pity to add
to this by the avoidable conservatism which is forced upon organized
labor at present through the unjust workings of a change.

It will be said that men will not work well if the fear of dismissal
does not spur them on.  I think it is only a small percentage of whom
this would be true at present.  And those of whom it would be true
might easily become industrious if they were given more congenial work
or a wiser training.  The residue who cannot be coaxed into industry
by any such methods are probably to be regarded as pathological cases,
requiring medical rather than penal treatment.  And against this
residue must be set the very much larger number who are now ruined in
health or in morale by the terrible uncertainty of their livelihood
and the great irregularity of their employment.  To very many,
security would bring a quite new possibility of physical and moral
health.

The most dangerous aspect of the tyranny of the employer is the power
which it gives him of interfering with men's activities outside their
working hours.  A man may be dismissed because the employer dislikes
his religion or his politics, or chooses to think his private life
immoral.  He may be dismissed because he tries to produce a spirit of
independence among his fellow employees.  He may fail completely to
find employment merely on the ground that he is better educated than
most and therefore more dangerous.  Such cases actually occur at
present.  This evil would not be remedied, but rather intensified,
under state socialism, because, where the State is the only employer,
there is no refuge from its prejudices such as may now accidentally
arise through the differing opinions of different men.  The State
would be able to enforce any system of beliefs it happened to like,
and it is almost certain that it would do so.  Freedom of thought
would be penalized, and all independence of spirit would die out.

Any rigid system would involve this evil.  It is very necessary that
there should be diversity and lack of complete systematization.
Minorities must be able to live and develop their opinions freely.  If
this is not secured, the instinct of persecution and conformity will
force all men into one mold and make all vital progress impossible.

For these reasons, no one ought to be allowed to suffer destitution so
long as he or she is willing to work.  And no kind of inquiry ought
to be made into opinion or private life.  It is only on this basis
that it is possible to build up an economic system not founded upon
tyranny and terror.


II

The power of the economic reformer is limited by the technical
productivity of labor.  So long as it was necessary to the bare
subsistence of the human race that most men should work very long
hours for a pittance, so long no civilization was possible except an
aristocratic one; if there were to be men with sufficient leisure for
any mental life, there had to be others who were sacrificed for the
good of the few.  But the time when such a system was necessary has
passed away with the progress of machinery.  It would be possible now,
if we had a wise economic system, for all who have mental needs to
find satisfaction for them.  By a few hours a day of manual work, a
man can produce as much as is necessary for his own subsistence; and
if he is willing to forgo luxuries, that is all that the community has
a right to demand of him.  It ought to be open to all who so desire to
do short hours of work for little pay, and devote their leisure to
whatever pursuit happens to attract them.  No doubt the great majority
of those who chose this course would spend their time in mere
amusement, as most of the rich do at present.  But it could not be
said, in such a society, that they were parasites upon the labor of
others.  And there would be a minority who would give their hours of
nominal idleness to science or art or literature, or some other
pursuit out of which fundamental progress may come.  In all such
matters, organization and system can only do harm.  The one thing that
can be done is to provide opportunity, without repining at the waste
that results from most men failing to make good use of the
opportunity.

But except in cases of unusual laziness or eccentric ambition, most
men would elect to do a full day's work for a full day's pay.  For
these, who would form the immense majority, the important thing is
that ordinary work should, as far as possible, afford interest and
independence and scope for initiative.  These things are more
important than income, as soon as a certain minimum has been reached.
They can be secured by gild socialism, by industrial self-government
subject to state control as regards the relations of a trade to the
rest of the community.  So far as I know, they cannot be secured in
any other way.

Guild socialism, as advocated by Mr. Orage and the "New Age," is
associated with a polemic against "political" action, and in favor of
direct economic action by trade-unions.  It shares this with
syndicalism, from which most of what is new in it is derived.  But I
see no reason for this attitude; political and economic action seem to
me equally necessary, each in its own time and place.  I think there
is danger in the attempt to use the machinery of the present
capitalist state for socialistic purposes.  But there is need of
political action to transform the machinery of the state, side by side
with the transformation which we hope to see in economic institutions.
In this country, neither transformation is likely to be brought about
by a sudden revolution; we must expect each to come step by step, if
at all, and I doubt if either could or should advance very far without
the other.

The economic system we should ultimately wish to see would be one in
which the state would be the sole recipient of economic rent, while
private capitalistic enterprises should be replaced by self-governing
combinations of those who actually do the work.  It ought to be
optional whether a man does a whole day's work for a whole day's pay,
or half a day's work for half a day's pay, except in cases where such
an arrangement would cause practical inconvenience.  A man's pay
should not cease through the accident of his work being no longer
needed, but should continue so long as he is willing to work, a new
trade being taught him at the public expense, if necessary.
Unwillingness to work should be treated medically or educationally,
when it could not be overcome by a change to some more congenial
occupation.

The workers in a given industry should all be combined in one
autonomous unit, and their work should not be subject to any outside
control.  The state should fix the price at which they produce, but
should leave the industry self-governing in all other respects.  In
fixing prices, the state should, as far as possible, allow each
industry to profit by any improvements which it might introduce into
its own processes, but should endeavor to prevent undeserved loss or
gain through changes in external economic conditions.  In this way
there would be every incentive to progress, with the least possible
danger of unmerited destitution.  And although large economic
organizations will continue, as they are bound to do, there will be a
diffusion of power which will take away the sense of individual
impotence from which men and women suffer at present.


III

Some men, though they may admit that such a system would be desirable,
will argue that it is impossible to bring it about, and that therefore
we must concentrate on more immediate objects.

I think it must be conceded that a political party ought to have
proximate aims, measures which it hopes to carry in the next session
or the next parliament, as well as a more distant goal.  Marxian
socialism, as it existed in Germany, seemed to me to suffer in this
way: although the party was numerically powerful, it was politically
weak, because it had no minor measures to demand while waiting for the
revolution.  And when, at last, German socialism was captured by those
who desired a less impracticable policy, the modification which
occurred was of exactly the wrong kind: acquiescence in bad policies,
such as militarism and imperialism, rather than advocacy of partial
reforms which, however inadequate, would still have been steps in the
right direction.

A similar defect was inherent in the policy of French syndicalism as
it existed before the war.  Everything was to wait for the general
strike; after adequate preparation, one day the whole proletariat
would unanimously refuse to work, the property owners would
acknowledge their defeat, and agree to abandon all their privileges
rather than starve.  This is a dramatic conception; but love of drama
is a great enemy of true vision.  Men cannot be trained, except under
very rare circumstances, to do something suddenly which is very
different from what they have been doing before.  If the general
strike were to succeed, the victors, despite their anarchism, would be
compelled at once to form an administration, to create a new police
force to prevent looting and wanton destruction, to establish a
provisional government issuing dictatorial orders to the various
sections of revolutionaries.  Now the syndicalists are opposed in
principle to all political action; they would feel that they were
departing from their theory in taking the necessary practical steps,
and they would be without the required training because of their
previous abstention from politics.  For these reasons it is likely
that, even after a syndicalist revolution, actual power would fall
into the hands of men who were not really syndicalists.

Another objection to a program which is to be realized suddenly at
some remote date by a revolution or a general strike is that
enthusiasm flags when there is nothing to do meanwhile, and no partial
success to lessen the weariness of waiting.  The only sort of movement
which can succeed by such methods is one where the sentiment and the
program are both very simple, as is the case in rebellions of
oppressed nations.  But the line of demarcation between capitalist and
wage-earner is not sharp, like the line between Turk and Armenian, or
between an Englishman and a native of India.  Those who have advocated
the social revolution have been mistaken in their political methods,
chiefly because they have not realized how many people there are in
the community whose sympathies and interests lie half on the side of
capital, half on the side of labor.  These people make a clear-cut
revolutionary policy very difficult.

For these reasons, those who aim at an economic reconstruction which
is not likely to be completed to-morrow must, if they are to have any
hope of success, be able to approach their goal by degrees, through
measures which are of some use in themselves, even if they should not
ultimately lead to the desired end.  There must be activities which
train men for those that they are ultimately to carry out, and there
must be possible achievements in the near future, not only a vague
hope of a distant paradise.

But although I believe that all this is true, I believe no less firmly
that really vital and radical reform requires some vision beyond the
immediate future, some realization of what human beings might make of
human life if they chose.  Without some such hope, men will not have
the energy and enthusiasm necessary to overcome opposition, or the
steadfastness to persist when their aims are for the moment unpopular.
Every man who has really sincere desire for any great amelioration in
the conditions of life has first to face ridicule, then persecution,
then cajolery and attempts at subtle corruption.  We know from painful
experience how few pass unscathed through these three ordeals.  The
last especially, when the reformer is shown all the kingdoms of the
earth, is difficult, indeed almost impossible, except for those who
have made their ultimate goal vivid to themselves by clear and
definite thought.

Economic systems are concerned essentially with the production and
distribution of material goods.  Our present system is wasteful on the
production side, and unjust on the side of distribution.  It involves
a life of slavery to economic forces for the great majority of the
community, and for the minority a degree of power over the lives of
others which no man ought to have.  In a good community the production
of the necessaries of existence would be a mere preliminary to the
important and interesting part of life, except for those who find a
pleasure in some part of the work of producing necessaries.  It is not
in the least necessary that economic needs should dominate man as they
do at present.  This is rendered necessary at present, partly by the
inequalities of wealth, partly by the fact that things of real value,
such as a good education, are difficult to acquire, except for the
well-to-do.

Private ownership of land and capital is not defensible on grounds of
justice, or on the ground that it is an economical way of producing
what the community needs.  But the chief objections to it are that it
stunts the lives of men and women, that it enshrines a ruthless
possessiveness in all the respect which is given to success, that it
leads men to fill the greater part of their time and thought with the
acquisition of purely material goods, and that it affords a terrible
obstacle to the advancement of civilization and creative energy.

The approach to a system free from these evils need not be sudden; it
is perfectly possible to proceed step by step towards economic freedom
and industrial self-government.  It is not true that there is any
outward difficulty in creating the kind of institutions that we have
been considering.  If organized labor wishes to create them, nothing
could stand in its way.  The difficulty involved is merely the
difficulty of inspiring men with hope, of giving them enough
imagination to see that the evils from which they suffer are
unnecessary, and enough thought to understand how the evils are to be
cured.  This is a difficulty which can be overcome by time and energy.
But it will not be overcome if the leaders of organized labor have no
breadth of outlook, no vision, no hopes beyond some slight superficial
improvement within the framework of the existing system.
Revolutionary action may be unnecessary, but revolutionary thought is
indispensable, and, as the outcome of thought, a rational and
constructive hope.




Chapter III: Pitfalls in Socialism


I

In its early days, socialism was a revolutionary movement of which the
object was the liberation of the wage-earning classes and the
establishment of freedom and justice.  The passage from capitalism to
the new régime was to be sudden and violent: capitalists were to be
expropriated without compensation, and their power was not to be
replaced by any new authority.

Gradually a change came over the spirit of socialism.  In France,
socialists became members of the government, and made and unmade
parliamentary majorities.  In Germany, social democracy grew so strong
that it became impossible for it to resist the temptation to barter
away some of its intransigeance in return for government recognition
of its claims.  In England, the Fabians taught the advantage of reform
as against revolution, and of conciliatory bargaining as against
irreconcilable antagonism.

The method of gradual reform has many merits as compared to the method
of revolution, and I have no wish to preach revolution.  But gradual
reform has certain dangers, to wit, the ownership or control of
businesses hitherto in private hands, and by encouraging legislative
interference for the benefit of various sections of the wage-earning
classes.  I think it is at least doubtful whether such measures do
anything at all to contribute toward the ideals which inspired the
early socialists and still inspire the great majority of those who
advocate some form of socialism.

Let us take as an illustration such a measure as state purchase of
railways.  This is a typical object of state socialism, thoroughly
practicable, already achieved in many countries, and clearly the sort
of step that must be taken in any piecemeal approach to complete
collectivism.  Yet I see no reason to believe that any real advance
toward democracy, freedom, or economic justice is achieved when a
state takes over the railways after full compensation to the
shareholders.

Economic justice demands a diminution, if not a total abolition, of
the proportion of the national income which goes to the recipients of
rent and interest.  But when the holders of railway shares are given
government stock to replace their shares, they are given the prospect
of an income in perpetuity equal to what they might reasonably expect
to have derived from their shares.  Unless there is reason to expect a
great increase in the earnings of railways, the whole operation does
nothing to alter the distribution of wealth.  This could only be
effected if the present owners were expropriated, or paid less than
the market value, or given a mere life-interest as compensation.  When
full value is given, economic justice is not advanced in any degree.

There is equally little advance toward freedom.  The men employed on
the railway have no more voice than they had before in the management
of the railway, or in the wages and conditions of work.  Instead of
having to fight the directors, with the possibility of an appeal to
the government, they now have to fight the government directly; and
experience does not lead to the view that a government department has
any special tenderness toward the claims of labor.  If they strike,
they have to contend against the whole organized power of the state,
which they can only do successfully if they happen to have a strong
public opinion on their side.  In view of the influence which the
state can always exercise on the press, public opinion is likely to be
biased against them, particularly when a nominally progressive
government is in power.  There will no longer be the possibility of
divergences between the policies of different railways.  Railway men
in England derived advantages for many years from the comparatively
liberal policy of the North Eastern Railway, which they were able to
use as an argument for a similar policy elsewhere.  Such possibilities
are excluded by the dead uniformity of state administration.

And there is no real advance toward democracy.  The administration of
the railways will be in the hands of officials whose bias and
associations separate them from labor, and who will develop an
autocratic temper through the habit of power.  The democratic
machinery by which these officials are nominally controlled is
cumbrous and remote, and can only be brought into operation on
first-class issues which rouse the interest of the whole nation.  Even
then it is very likely that the superior education of the officials
and the government, combined with the advantages of their position,
will enable them to mislead the public as to the issues, and alienate
the general sympathy even from the most excellent cause.

I do not deny that these evils exist at present; I say only that they
will not be remedied by such measures as the nationalization of
railways in the present economic and political environment.  A greater
upheaval, and a greater change in men's habits of mind, is necessary
for any really vital progress.


II

State socialism, even in a nation which possesses the form of
political democracy, is not a truly democratic system.  The way in
which it fails to be democratic may be made plain by an analogy from
the political sphere.  Every democrat recognizes that the Irish ought
to have self-government for Irish affairs, and ought not to be told
that they have no grievance because they share in the Parliament of
the United Kingdom.  It is essential to democracy that any group of
citizens whose interests or desires separate them at all widely from
the rest of the community should be free to decide their internal
affairs for themselves.  And what is true of national or local groups
is equally true of economic groups, such as miners or railway men.
The national machinery of general elections is by no means sufficient
to secure for groups of this kind the freedom which they ought to
have.

The power of officials, which is a great and growing danger in the
modern state, arises from the fact that the majority of the voters,
who constitute the only ultimate popular control over officials, are
as a rule not interested in any one particular question, and are
therefore not likely to interfere effectively against an official who
is thwarting the wishes of the minority who are interested.  The
official is nominally subject to indirect popular control, but not to
the control of those who are directly affected by his action.  The
bulk of the public will either never hear about the matter in dispute,
or, if they do hear, will form a hasty opinion based upon inadequate
information, which is far more likely to come from the side of the
officials than from the section of the community which is affected by
the question at issue.  In an important political issue, some degree
of knowledge is likely to be diffused in time; but in other matters
there is little hope that this will happen.

It may be said that the power of officials is much less dangerous than
the power of capitalists, because officials have no economic interests
that are opposed to those of wage-earners.  But this argument involves
far too simple a theory of political human nature--a theory which
orthodox socialism adopted from the classical political economy, and
has tended to retain in spite of growing evidence of its falsity.
Economic self-interest, and even economic class-interest, is by no
means the only important political motive.  Officials, whose salary is
generally quite unaffected by their decisions on particular questions,
are likely, if they are of average honesty, to decide according to
their view of the public interest; but their view will none the less
have a bias which will often lead them wrong.  It is important to
understand this bias before entrusting our destinies too unreservedly
to government departments.

The first thing to observe is that, in any very large organization,
and above all in a great state, officials and legislators are usually
very remote from those whom they govern, and not imaginatively
acquainted with the conditions of life to which their decisions will
be applied.  This makes them ignorant of much that they ought to know,
even when they are industrious and willing to learn whatever can be
taught by statistics and blue-books.  The one thing they understand
intimately is the office routine and the administrative rules.  The
result is an undue anxiety to secure a uniform system.  I have heard
of a French minister of education taking out his watch, and remarking,
"At this moment all the children of such and such an age in France are
learning so and so." This is the ideal of the administrator, an ideal
utterly fatal to free growth, initiative, experiment, or any far
reaching innovation.  Laziness is not one of the motives recognized in
textbooks on political theory, because all ordinary knowledge of human
nature is considered unworthy of the dignity of these works; yet we
all know that laziness is an immensely powerful motive with all but a
small minority of mankind.

Unfortunately, in this case laziness is reinforced by love of power,
which leads energetic officials to create the systems which lazy
officials like to administer.  The energetic official inevitably
dislikes anything that he does not control.  His official sanction
must be obtained before anything can be done.  Whatever he finds in
existence he wishes to alter in some way, so as to have the
satisfaction of feeling his power and making it felt.  If he is
conscientious, he will think out some perfectly uniform and rigid
scheme which he believes to be the best possible, and he will then
impose this scheme ruthlessly, whatever promising growths he may have
to lop down for the sake of symmetry.  The result inevitably has
something of the deadly dullness of a new rectangular town, as
compared with the beauty and richness of an ancient city which has
lived and grown with the separate lives and individualities of many
generations.  What has grown is always more living than what has been
decreed; but the energetic official will always prefer the tidiness of
what he has decreed to the apparent disorder of spontaneous growth.

The mere possession of power tends to produce a love of power, which
is a very dangerous motive, because the only sure proof of power
consists in preventing others from doing what they wish to do.  The
essential theory of democracy is the diffusion of power among the
whole people, so that the evils produced by one man's possession of
great power shall be obviated.  But the diffusion of power through
democracy is only effective when the voters take an interest in the
question involved.  When the question does not interest them, they do
not attempt to control the administration, and all actual power passes
into the hands of officials.

For this reason, the true ends of democracy are not achieved by state
socialism or by any system which places great power in the hands of
men subject to no popular control except that which is more or less
indirectly exercised through parliament.

Any fresh survey of men's political actions shows that, in those who
have enough energy to be politically effective, love of power is a
stronger motive than economic self-interest.  Love of power actuates
the great millionaires, who have far more money than they can spend,
but continue to amass wealth merely in order to control more and more
of the world's finance.[2]  Love of power is obviously the ruling
motive of many politicians.  It is also the chief cause of wars, which
are admittedly almost always a bad speculation from the mere point of
view of wealth.  For this reason, a new economic system which merely
attacks economic motives and does not interfere with the concentration
of power is not likely to effect any very great improvement in the
world.  This is one of the chief reasons for regarding state socialism
with suspicion.

[2] Cf. J. A. Hobson, "The Evolution of Modern Capitalism."


III

The problem of the distribution of power is a more difficult one than
the problem of the distribution of wealth.  The machinery of
representative government has concentrated on ultimate power as the
only important matter, and has ignored immediate executive power.
Almost nothing has been done to democratize administration.
Government officials, in virtue of their income, security, and social
position, are likely to be on the side of the rich, who have been
their daily associates ever since the time of school and college.  And
whether or not they are on the side of the rich, they are not likely,
for the reasons we have been considering, to be genuinely in favor of
progress.  What applies to government officials applies also to
members of Parliament, with the sole difference that they have had to
recommend themselves to a constituency.  This, however, only adds
hypocrisy to the other qualities of a ruling caste.  Whoever has stood
in the lobby of the House of Commons watching members emerge with
wandering eye and hypothetical smile, until the constituent is espied,
his arm taken, "my dear fellow" whispered in his ear, and his steps
guided toward the inner precincts--whoever, observing this, has
realized that these are the arts by which men become and remain
legislators, can hardly fail to feel that democracy as it exists is
not an absolutely perfect instrument of government.  It is a painful
fact that the ordinary voter, at any rate in England, is quite blind
to insincerity.  The man who does not care about any definite
political measures can generally be won by corruption or flattery,
open or concealed; the man who is set on securing reforms will
generally prefer an ambitious windbag to a man who desires the public
good without possessing a ready tongue.  And the ambitious windbag, as
soon as he has become a power by the enthusiasm he has aroused, will
sell his influence to the governing clique, sometimes openly,
sometimes by the more subtle method of intentionally failing at a
crisis.  This is part of the normal working of democracy as embodied
in representative institutions.  Yet a cure must be found if democracy
is not to remain a farce.

One of the sources of evil in modern large democracies is the fact
that most of the electorate have no direct or vital interest in most
of the questions that arise.  Should Welsh children be allowed the use
of the Welsh language in schools?  Should gipsies be compelled to
abandon their nomadic life at the bidding of the education
authorities?  Should miners have an eight-hour day?  Should Christian
Scientists be compelled to call in doctors in case of serious illness?
These are matters of passionate interest to certain sections of the
community, but of very little interest to the great majority.  If they
are decided according to the wishes of the numerical majority, the
intense desires of a minority will be overborne by the very slight and
uninformed whims of the indifferent remainder.  If the minority are
geographically concentrated, so that they can decide elections in a
certain number of constituencies, like the Welsh and the miners, they
have a good chance of getting their way, by the wholly beneficent
process which its enemies describe as log-rolling.  But if they are
scattered and politically feeble, like the gipsies and the Christian
Scientists, they stand a very poor chance against the prejudices of
the majority.  Even when they are geographically concentrated, like
the Irish, they may fail to obtain their wishes, because they arouse
some hostility or some instinct of domination in the majority.  Such a
state of affairs is the negation of all democratic principles.

The tyranny of the majority is a very real danger.  It is a mistake to
suppose that the majority is necessarily right.  On every new question
the majority is always wrong at first.  In matters where the state
must act as a whole, such as tariffs, for example, decision by
majorities is probably the best method that can be devised.  But there
are a great many questions in which there is no need of a uniform
decision.  Religion is recognized as one of these.  Education ought to
be one, provided a certain minimum standard is attained.  Military
service clearly ought to be one.  Wherever divergent action by
different groups is possible without anarchy, it ought to be
permitted.  In such cases it will be found by those who consider past
history that, whenever any new fundamental issue arises, the majority
are in the wrong, because they are guided by prejudice and habit.
Progress comes through the gradual effect of a minority in converting
opinion and altering custom.  At one time--not so very long ago--it
was considered monstrous wickedness to maintain that old women ought
not to be burnt as witches.  If those who held this opinion had been
forcibly suppressed, we should still be steeped in medieval
superstition.  For such reasons, it is of the utmost importance that
the majority should refrain from imposing its will as regards matters
in which uniformity is not absolutely necessary.


IV

The cure for the evils and dangers which we have been considering is a
very great extension of devolution and federal government.  Wherever
there is a national consciousness, as in Wales and Ireland, the area
in which it exists ought to be allowed to decide all purely local
affairs without external interference.  But there are many matters
which ought to be left to the management, not of local groups, but of
trade groups, or of organizations embodying some set of opinions.  In
the East, men are subject to different laws according to the religion
they profess.  Something of this kind is necessary if any semblance of
liberty is to exist where there is great divergence in beliefs.

Some matters are essentially geographical; for instance, gas and
water, roads, tariffs, armies and navies.  These must be decided by an
authority representing an area.  How large the area ought to be,
depends upon accidents of topography and sentiment, and also upon the
nature of the matter involved.  Gas and water require a small area,
roads a somewhat larger one, while the only satisfactory area for an
army or a navy is the whole planet, since no smaller area will prevent
war.

But the proper unit in most economic questions, and also in most
questions that are intimately concerned with personal opinions, is not
geographical at all.  The internal management of railways ought not to
be in the hands of the geographical state, for reasons which we have
already considered.  Still less ought it to be in the hands of a set
of irresponsible capitalists.  The only truly democratic system would
be one which left the internal management of railways in the hands of
the men who work on them.  These men should elect the general manager,
and a parliament of directors if necessary.  All questions of wages,
conditions of labor, running of trains, and acquisition of material,
should be in the hands of a body responsible only to those actually
engaged in the work of the railway.

The same arguments apply to other large trades: mining, iron and
steel, cotton, and so on.  British trade-unionism, it seems to me, has
erred in conceiving labor and capital as both permanent forces, which
were to be brought to some equality of strength by the organization of
labor.  This seems to me too modest an ideal.  The ideal which I
should wish to substitute involves the conquest of democracy and
self-government in the economic sphere as in the political sphere, and
the total abolition of the power now wielded by the capitalist.  The
man who works on a railway ought to have a voice in the government of
the railway, just as much as the man who works in a state has a right
to a voice in the management of his state.  The concentration of
business initiative in the hands of the employers is a great evil, and
robs the employees of their legitimate share of interest in the larger
problems of their trade.

French syndicalists were the first to advocate the system of trade
autonomy as a better solution than state socialism.  But in their view
the trades were to be independent, almost like sovereign states at
present.  Such a system would not promote peace, any more than it does
at present in international relations.  In the affairs of any body of
men, we may broadly distinguish what may be called questions of home
politics from questions of foreign politics.  Every group sufficiently
well-marked to constitute a political entity ought to be autonomous in
regard to internal matters, but not in regard to those that directly
affect the outside world.  If two groups are both entirely free as
regards their relations to each other, there is no way of averting the
danger of an open or covert appeal to force.  The relations of a group
of men to the outside world ought, whenever possible, to be controlled
by a neutral authority.  It is here that the state is necessary for
adjusting the relations between different trades.  The men who make
some commodity should be entirely free as regards hours of labor,
distribution of the total earnings of the trade, and all questions of
business management.  But they should not be free as regards the price
of what they produce, since price is a matter concerning their
relations to the rest of the community.  If there were nominal freedom
in regard to price, there would be a danger of a constant tug-of-war,
in which those trades which were most immediately necessary to the
existence of the community could always obtain an unfair advantage.
Force is no more admirable in the economic sphere than in dealings
between states.  In order to secure the maximum of freedom with the
minimum of force, the universal principle is: Autonomy within each
politically important group, and a neutral authority for deciding
questions involving relations between groups.  The neutral authority
should, of course, rest on a democratic basis, but should, if
possible, represent a constituency wider than that of the groups
concerned.  In international affairs the only adequate authority would
be one representing all civilized nations.

In order to prevent undue extension of the power of such authorities,
it is desirable and necessary that the various autonomous groups
should be very jealous of their liberties, and very ready to resist by
political means any encroachments upon their independence.  State
socialism does not tolerate such groups, each with their own officials
responsible to the group.  Consequently it abandons the internal
affairs of a group to the control of men not responsible to that group
or specially aware of its needs.  This opens the door to tyranny and
to the destruction of initiative.  These dangers are avoided by a
system which allows any group of men to combine for any given purpose,
provided it is not predatory, and to claim from the central authority
such self-government as is necessary to the carrying out of the
purpose.  Churches of various denominations afford an instance.  Their
autonomy was won by centuries of warfare and persecution.  It is to be
hoped that a less terrible struggle will be required to achieve the
same result in the economic sphere.  But whatever the obstacles, I
believe the importance of liberty is as great in the one case as it
has been admitted to be in the other.




Chapter IV: Individual Liberty and Public Control


I

Society cannot exist without law and order, and cannot advance except
through the initiative of vigorous innovators.  Yet law and order are
always hostile to innovations, and innovators are almost always, to
some extent, anarchists.  Those whose minds are dominated by fear of a
relapse towards barbarism will emphasize the importance of law and
order, while those who are inspired by the hope of an advance towards
civilization will usually be more conscious of the need of individual
initiative.  Both temperaments are necessary, and wisdom lies in
allowing each to operate freely where it is beneficent.  But those who
are on the side of law and order, since they are reinforced by custom
and the instinct for upholding the status quo, have no need of a
reasoned defense.  It is the innovators who have difficulty in being
allowed to exist and work.  Each generation believes that this
difficulty is a thing of the past, but each generation is only
tolerant of past innovations.  Those of its own day are met with the
same persecution as though the principle of toleration had never been
heard of.

"In early society," says Westermarck, "customs are not only moral
rules, but the only moral rules ever thought of.  The savage strictly
complies with the Hegelian command that no man must have a private
conscience.  The following statement, which refers to the Tinnevelly
Shanars, may be quoted as a typical example: 'Solitary individuals
amongst them rarely adopt any new opinions, or any new course of
procedure.  They follow the multitude to do evil, and they follow the
multitude to do good.  They think in herds.'"[3]

[3] "The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas," 2d edition,
Vol. I, p. 119.

Those among ourselves who have never thought a thought or done a deed
in the slightest degree different from the thoughts and deeds of our
neighbors will congratulate themselves on the difference between us
and the savage.  But those who have ever attempted any real innovation
cannot help feeling that the people they know are not so very unlike
the Tinnevelly Shanars.

Under the influence of socialism, even progressive opinion, in recent
years, has been hostile to individual liberty.  Liberty is associated,
in the minds of reformers, with laissez-faire, the Manchester School,
and the exploitation of women and children which resulted from what
was euphemistically called "free competition." All these things were
evil, and required state interference; in fact, there is need of an
immense increase of state action in regard to cognate evils which
still exist.  In everything that concerns the economic life of the
community, as regards both distribution and conditions of production,
what is required is more public control, not less--how much more, I
do not profess to know.

Another direction in which there is urgent need of the substitution of
law and order for anarchy is international relations.  At present,
each sovereign state has complete individual freedom, subject only to
the sanction of war.  This individual freedom will have to be
curtailed in regard to external relations if wars are ever to cease.

But when we pass outside the sphere of material possessions, we find
that the arguments in favor of public control almost entirely
disappear.

Religion, to begin with, is recognized as a matter in which the state
ought not to interfere.  Whether a man is Christian, Mahometan, or Jew
is a question of no public concern, so long as he obeys the laws; and
the laws ought to be such as men of all religions can obey.  Yet even
here there are limits.  No civilized state would tolerate a religion
demanding human sacrifice.  The English in India put an end to suttee,
in spite of a fixed principle of non-interference with native
religious customs.  Perhaps they were wrong to prevent suttee, yet
almost every European would have done the same.  We cannot effectively
doubt that such practices ought to be stopped, however we may theorize
in favor of religious liberty.

In such cases, the interference with liberty is imposed from without
by a higher civilization.  But the more common case, and the more
interesting, is when an independent state interferes on behalf of
custom against individuals who are feeling their way toward more
civilized beliefs and institutions.

"In New South Wales," says Westermarck, "the first-born of every lubra
used to be eaten by the tribe 'as part of a religious ceremony.' In
the realm of Khai-muh, in China, according to a native account, it was
customary to kill and devour the eldest son alive.  Among certain
tribes in British Columbia the first child is often sacrificed to the
sun.  The Indians of Florida, according to Le Moyne de Morgues,
sacrificed the first-born son to the chief....'"[4]

[4] Op cit., p. 459.

There are pages and pages of such instances.

There is nothing analogous to these practices among ourselves.  When
the first-born in Florida was told that his king and country needed
him, this was a mere mistake, and with us mistakes of this kind do not
occur.  But it is interesting to inquire how these superstitions died
out, in such cases, for example, as that of Khai-muh, where foreign
compulsion is improbable.  We may surmise that some parents, under the
selfish influence of parental affection, were led to doubt whether the
sun would really be angry if the eldest child were allowed to live.
Such rationalism would be regarded as very dangerous, since it was
calculated to damage the harvest.  For generations the opinion would
be cherished in secret by a handful of cranks, who would not be able
to act upon it.  At last, by concealment or flight, a few parents
would save their children from the sacrifice.  Such parents would be
regarded as lacking all public spirit, and as willing to endanger the
community for their private pleasure.  But gradually it would appear
that the state remained intact, and the crops were no worse than in
former years.  Then, by a fiction, a child would be deemed to have
been sacrificed if it was solemnly dedicated to agriculture or some
other work of national importance chosen by the chief.  It would be
many generations before the child would be allowed to choose its own
occupation after it had grown old enough to know its own tastes and
capacities.  And during all those generations, children would be
reminded that only an act of grace had allowed them to live at all,
and would exist under the shadow of a purely imaginary duty to the
state.

The position of those parents who first disbelieved in the utility of
infant sacrifice illustrates all the difficulties which arise in
connection with the adjustment of individual freedom to public
control.  The authorities, believing the sacrifice necessary for the
good of the community, were bound to insist upon it; the parents,
believing it useless, were equally bound to do everything in their
power toward saving the child.  How ought both parties to act in such
a case?

The duty of the skeptical parent is plain: to save the child by any
possible means, to preach the uselessness of the sacrifice in season
and out of season, and to endure patiently whatever penalty the law
may indict for evasion.  But the duty of the authorities is far less
clear.  So long as they remain firmly persuaded that the universal
sacrifice of the first-born is indispensable, they are bound to
persecute those who seek to undermine this belief.  But they will, if
they are conscientious, very carefully examine the arguments of
opponents, and be willing in advance to admit that these arguments
may be sound.  They will carefully search their own hearts to see
whether hatred of children or pleasure in cruelty has anything to do
with their belief.  They will remember that in the past history of
Khai-muh there are innumerable instances of beliefs, now known to be
false, on account of which those who disagreed with the prevalent view
were put to death.  Finally they will reflect that, though errors
which are traditional are often wide-spread, new beliefs seldom win
acceptance unless they are nearer to the truth than what they replace;
and they will conclude that a new belief is probably either an
advance, or so unlikely to become common as to be innocuous.  All
these considerations will make them hesitate before they resort to
punishment.


II

The study of past times and uncivilized races makes it clear beyond
question that the customary beliefs of tribes or nations are almost
invariably false.  It is difficult to divest ourselves completely of
the customary beliefs of our own age and nation, but it is not very
difficult to achieve a certain degree of doubt in regard to them.  The
Inquisitor who burnt men at the stake was acting with true humanity if
all his beliefs were correct; but if they were in error at any point,
he was inflicting a wholly unnecessary cruelty.  A good working maxim
in such matters is this: Do not trust customary beliefs so far as to
perform actions which must be disastrous unless the beliefs in
question are wholly true.  The world would be utterly bad, in the
opinion of the average Englishman, unless he could say "Britannia
rules the waves"; in the opinion of the average German, unless he
could say "Deutschland über alles." For the sake of these beliefs,
they are willing to destroy European civilization.  If the beliefs
should happen to be false, their action is regrettable.

One fact which emerges from these considerations is that no obstacle
should be placed in the way of thought and its expression, nor yet in
the way of statements of fact.  This was formerly common ground among
liberal thinkers, though it was never quite realized in the practice
of civilized countries.  But it has recently become, throughout
Europe, a dangerous paradox, on account of which men suffer
imprisonment or starvation.  For this reason it has again become worth
stating.  The grounds for it are so evident that I should be ashamed
to repeat them if they were not universally ignored.  But in the
actual world it is very necessary to repeat them.

To attain complete truth is not given to mortals, but to advance
toward it by successive steps is not impossible.  On any matter of
general interest, there is usually, in any given community at any
given time, a received opinion, which is accepted as a matter of
course by all who give no special thought to the matter.  Any
questioning of the received opinion rouses hostility, for a number of
reasons.

The most important of these is the instinct of conventionality, which
exists in all gregarious animals and often leads them to put to death
any markedly peculiar member of the herd.

The next most important is the feeling of insecurity aroused by doubt
as to the beliefs by which we are in the habit of regulating our
lives.  Whoever has tried to explain the philosophy of Berkeley to a
plain man will have seen in its unadulterated form the anger aroused
by this feeling.  What the plain man derives from Berkeley's
philosophy at a first hearing is an uncomfortable suspicion that
nothing is solid, so that it is rash to sit on a chair or to expect
the floor to sustain us.  Because this suspicion is uncomfortable, it
is irritating, except to those who regard the whole argument as merely
nonsense.  And in a more or less analogous way any questioning of what
has been taken for granted destroys the feeling of standing on solid
ground, and produces a condition of bewildered fear.

A third reason which makes men dislike novel opinions is that vested
interests are bound up with old beliefs.  The long fight of the church
against science, from Giordano Bruno to Darwin, is attributable to
this motive among others.  The horror of socialism which existed in
the remote past was entirely attributable to this cause.  But it would
be a mistake to assume, as is done by those who seek economic motives
everywhere, that vested interests are the principal source of anger
against novelties in thought.  If this were the case, intellectual
progress would be much more rapid than it is.

The instinct of conventionality, horror of uncertainty, and vested
interests, all militate against the acceptance of a new idea.  And it
is even harder to think of a new idea than to get it accepted; most
people might spend a lifetime in reflection without ever making a
genuinely original discovery.

In view of all these obstacles, it is not likely that any society at
any time will suffer from a plethora of heretical opinions.  Least of
all is this likely in a modern civilized society, where the conditions
of life are in constant rapid change, and demand, for successful
adaptation, an equally rapid change in intellectual outlook.  There
should be an attempt, therefore, to encourage, rather than discourage,
the expression of new beliefs and the dissemination of knowledge
tending to support them.  But the very opposite is, in fact, the case.
From childhood upward, everything is done to make the minds of men and
women conventional and sterile.  And if, by misadventure, some spark
of imagination remains, its unfortunate possessor is considered
unsound and dangerous, worthy only of contempt in time of peace and of
prison or a traitor's death in time of war.  Yet such men are known to
have been in the past the chief benefactors of mankind, and are the
very men who receive most honor as soon as they are safely dead.

The whole realm of thought and opinion is utterly unsuited to public
control; it ought to be as free, and as spontaneous as is possible to
those who know what others have believed.  The state is justified in
insisting that children shall be educated, but it is not justified in
forcing their education to proceed on a uniform plan and to be
directed to the production of a dead level of glib uniformity.
Education, and the life of the mind generally, is a matter in which
individual initiative is the chief thing needed; the function of the
state should begin and end with insistence on some kind of education,
and, if possible, a kind which promotes mental individualism, not a
kind which happens to conform to the prejudices of government
officials.


III

Questions of practical morals raise more difficult problems than
questions of mere opinion.  The thugs honestly believe it their duty
to commit murders, but the government does not acquiesce.  The
conscientious objectors honestly hold the opposite opinion, and again
the government does not acquiesce.  Killing is a state prerogative; it
is equally criminal to do it unbidden and not to do it when bidden.
The same applies to theft, unless it is on a large scale or by one who
is already rich.  Thugs and thieves are men who use force in their
dealings with their neighbors, and we may lay it down broadly that the
private use of force should be prohibited except in rare cases,
however conscientious may be its motive.  But this principle will not
justify compelling men to use force at the bidding of the state, when
they do not believe it justified by the occasion.  The punishment of
conscientious objectors seems clearly a violation of individual
liberty within its legitimate sphere.

It is generally assumed without question that the state has a right to
punish certain kinds of sexual irregularity.  No one doubts that the
Mormons sincerely believed polygamy to be a desirable practice, yet
the United States required them to abandon its legal recognition, and
probably any other Christian country would have done likewise.
Nevertheless, I do not think this prohibition was wise.  Polygamy is
legally permitted in many parts of the world, but is not much
practised except by chiefs and potentates.  If, as Europeans generally
believe, it is an undesirable custom, it is probable that the Mormons
would have soon abandoned it, except perhaps for a few men of
exceptional position.  If, on the other hand, it had proved a
successful experiment, the world would have acquired a piece of
knowledge which it is now unable to possess.  I think in all such
cases the law should only intervene when there is some injury
inflicted without the consent of the injured person.

It is obvious that men and women would not tolerate having their wives
or husbands selected by the state, whatever eugenists might have to
say in favor of such a plan.  In this it seems clear that ordinary
public opinion is in the right, not because people choose wisely, but
because any choice of their own is better than a forced marriage.
What applies to marriage ought also to apply to the choice of a trade
or profession; although some men have no marked preferences, most men
greatly prefer some occupations to others, and are far more likely to
be useful citizens if they follow their preferences than if they are
thwarted by a public authority.

The case of the man who has an intense conviction that he ought to do
a certain kind of work is peculiar, and perhaps not very common; but
it is important because it includes some very important individuals.
Joan of Arc and Florence Nightingale defied convention in obedience to
a feeling of this sort; reformers and agitators in unpopular causes,
such as Mazzini, have belonged to this class; so have many men of
science.  In cases of this kind the individual conviction deserves the
greatest respect, even if there seems no obvious justification for it.
Obedience to the impulse is very unlikely to do much harm, and may
well do great good.  The practical difficulty is to distinguish such
impulses from desires which produce similar manifestations.  Many
young people wish to be authors without having an impulse to write any
particular book, or wish to be painters without having an impulse to
create any particular picture.  But a little experience will usually
show the difference between a genuine and a spurious impulse; and
there is less harm in indulging the spurious impulse for a time than
in thwarting the impulse which is genuine.  Nevertheless, the plain
man almost always has a tendency to thwart the genuine impulse,
because it seems anarchic and unreasonable, and is seldom able to give
a good account of itself in advance.

What is markedly true of some notable personalities is true, in a
lesser degree, of almost every individual who has much vigor or force
of life; there is an impulse towards activity of some kind, as a rule
not very definite in youth, but growing gradually more sharply
outlined under the influence of education and opportunity.  The direct
impulse toward a kind of activity for its own sake must be
distinguished from the desire for the expected effects of the
activity.  A young man may desire the rewards of great achievement
without having any spontaneous impulse toward the activities which
lead to achievement.  But those who actually achieve much, although
they may desire the rewards, have also something in their nature which
inclines them to choose a certain kind of work as the road which they
must travel if their ambition is to be satisfied.  This artist's
impulse, as it may be called, is a thing of infinite value to the
individual, and often to the world; to respect it in oneself and in
others makes up nine tenths of the good life.  In most human beings it
is rather frail, rather easily destroyed or disturbed; parents and
teachers are too often hostile to it, and our economic system crushes
out its last remnants in young men and young women.  The result is
that human beings cease to be individual, or to retain the native
pride that is their birthright; they become machine-made, tame,
convenient for the bureaucrat and the drill-sergeant, capable of being
tabulated in statistics without anything being omitted.  This is the
fundamental evil resulting from lack of liberty; and it is an evil
which is being continually intensified as population grows more dense
and the machinery of organization grows more efficient.

The things that men desire are many and various: admiration,
affection, power, security, ease, outlets for energy, are among the
commonest of motives.  But such abstractions do not touch what makes
the difference between one man and another.  Whenever I go to the
zoölogical gardens, I am struck by the fact that all the movements of
a stork have some common quality, differing from the movements of a
parrot or an ostrich.  It is impossible to put in words what the
common quality is, and yet we feel that each thing an animal does is
the sort of thing we might expect that animal to do.  This indefinable
quality constitutes the individuality of the animal, and gives rise to
the pleasure we feel in watching the animal's actions.  In a human
being, provided he has not been crushed by an economic or governmental
machine, there is the same kind of individuality, a something
distinctive without which no man or woman can achieve much of
importance, or retain the full dignity which is native to human
beings.  It is this distinctive individuality that is loved by the
artist, whether painter or writer.  The artist himself, and the man
who is creative in no matter what direction, has more of it than the
average man.  Any society which crushes this quality, whether
intentionally or by accident, must soon become utterly lifeless and
traditional, without hope of progress and without any purpose in its
being.  To preserve and strengthen the impulse that makes
individuality should be the foremost object of all political
institutions.


IV

We now arrive at certain general principles in regard to individual
liberty and public control.

The greater part of human impulses may be divided into two classes,
those which are possessive and those which are constructive or
creative.  Social institutions are the garments or embodiments of
impulses, and may be classified roughly according to the impulses
which they embody.  Property is the direct expression of
possessiveness; science and art are among the most direct expressions
of creativeness.  Possessiveness is either defensive or aggressive; it
seeks either to retain against a robber, or to acquire from a present
holder.  In either case an attitude of hostility toward others is of
its essence.  It would be a mistake to suppose that defensive
possessiveness is always justifiable, while the aggressive kind is
always blameworthy; where there is great injustice in the status
quo, the exact opposite may be the case, and ordinarily neither is
justifiable.

State interference with the actions of individuals is necessitated by
possessiveness.  Some goods can be acquired or retained by force,
while others cannot.  A wife can be acquired by force, as the Romans
acquired the Sabine women; but a wife's affection cannot be acquired
in this way.  There is no record that the Romans desired the affection
of the Sabine women; and those in whom possessive impulses are strong
tend to care chiefly for the goods that force can secure.  All
material goods belong to this class.  Liberty in regard to such goods,
if it were unrestricted, would make the strong rich and the weak poor.
In a capitalistic society, owing to the partial restraints imposed by
law, it makes cunning men rich and honest men poor, because the force
of the state is put at men's disposal, not according to any just or
rational principle, but according to a set of traditional maxims of
which the explanation is purely historical.

In all that concerns possession and the use of force, unrestrained
liberty involves anarchy and injustice.  Freedom to kill, freedom to
rob, freedom to defraud, no longer belong to individuals, though they
still belong to great states, and are exercised by them in the name of
patriotism.  Neither individuals nor states ought to be free to exert
force on their own initiative, except in such sudden emergencies as
will subsequently be admitted in justification by a court of law.  The
reason for this is that the exertion of force by one individual
against another is always an evil on both sides, and can only be
tolerated when it is compensated by some overwhelming resultant good.
In order to minimize the amount of force actually exerted in the
world, it is necessary that there should be a public authority, a
repository of practically irresistible force, whose function should be
primarily to repress the private use of force.  A use of force is
private when it is exerted by one of the interested parties, or by
his friends or accomplices, not by a public neutral authority
according to some rule which is intended to be in the public interest.

The régime of private property under which we live does much too
little to restrain the private use of force.  When a man owns a piece
of land, for example, he may use force against trespassers, though
they must not use force against him.  It is clear that some
restriction of the liberty of trespass is necessary for the
cultivation of the land.  But if such powers are to be given to an
individual, the state ought to satisfy itself that he occupies no more
land than he is warranted in occupying in the public interest, and
that the share of the produce of the land that comes to him is no more
than a just reward for his labors.  Probably the only way in which
such ends can be achieved is by state ownership of land.  The
possessors of land and capital are able at present, by economic
pressure, to use force against those who have no possessions.  This
force is sanctioned by law, while force exercised by the poor against
the rich is illegal.  Such a state of things is unjust, and does not
diminish the use of private force as much as it might be diminished.

The whole realm of the possessive impulses, and of the use of force to
which they give rise, stands in need of control by a public neutral
authority, in the interests of liberty no less than of justice.
Within a nation, this public authority will naturally be the state; in
relations between nations, if the present anarchy is to cease, it will
have to be some international parliament.

But the motive underlying the public control of men's possessive
impulses should always be the increase of liberty, both by the
prevention of private tyranny and by the liberation of creative
impulses.  If public control is not to do more harm than good, it must
be so exercised as to leave the utmost freedom of private initiative
in all those ways that do not involve the private use of force.  In
this respect all governments have always failed egregiously, and there
is no evidence that they are improving.

The creative impulses, unlike those that are possessive, are directed
to ends in which one man's gain is not another man's loss.  The man
who makes a scientific discovery or writes a poem is enriching others
at the same time as himself.  Any increase in knowledge or good-will
is a gain to all who are affected by it, not only to the actual
possessor.  Those who feel the joy of life are a happiness to others
as well as to themselves.  Force cannot create such things, though it
can destroy them; no principle of distributive justice applies to
them, since the gain of each is the gain of all.  For these reasons,
the creative part of a man's activity ought to be as free as possible
from all public control, in order that it may remain spontaneous and
full of vigor.  The only function of the state in regard to this part
of the individual life should be to do everything possible toward
providing outlets and opportunities.

In every life a part is governed by the community, and a part by
private initiative.  The part governed by private initiative is
greatest in the most important individuals, such as men of genius and
creative thinkers.  This part ought only to be restricted when it is
predatory; otherwise, everything ought to be done to make it as great
and as vigorous as possible.  The object of education ought not to be
to make all men think alike, but to make each think in the way which
is the fullest expression of his own personality.  In the choice of a
means of livelihood all young men and young women ought, as far as
possible, to be able to choose what is attractive to them; if no
money-making occupation is attractive, they ought to be free to do
little work for little pay, and spend their leisure as they choose.
Any kind of censure on freedom of thought or on the dissemination of
knowledge is, of course, to be condemned utterly.

Huge organizations, both political and economic, are one of the
distinguishing characteristics of the modern world.  These
organizations have immense power, and often use their power to
discourage originality in thought and action.  They ought, on the
contrary, to give the freest scope that is possible without producing
anarchy or violent conflict.  They ought not to take cognizance of any
part of a man's life except what is concerned with the legitimate
objects of public control, namely, possessions and the use of force.
And they ought, by devolution, to leave as large a share of control as
possible in the hands of individuals and small groups.  If this is not
done, the men at the head of these vast organizations will infallibly
become tyrannous through the habit of excessive power, and will in
time interfere in ways that crush out individual initiative.

The problem which faces the modern world is the combination of
individual initiative with the increase in the scope and size of
organizations.  Unless it is solved, individuals will grow less and
less full of life and vigor, and more and more passively submissive to
conditions imposed upon them.  A society composed of such individuals
cannot be progressive or add much to the world's stock of mental and
spiritual possessions.  Only personal liberty and the encouragement of
initiative can secure these things.  Those who resist authority when
it encroaches upon the legitimate sphere of the individual are
performing a service to society, however little society may value it.
In regard to the past, this is universally acknowledged; but it is no
less true in regard to the present and the future.




Chapter V: National Independence and Internationalism


In the relations between states, as in the relations of groups within
a single state, what is to be desired is independence for each as
regards internal affairs, and law rather than private force as regards
external affairs.  But as regards groups within a state, it is
internal independence that must be emphasized, since that is what is
lacking; subjection to law has been secured, on the whole, since the
end of the Middle Ages.  In the relations between states, on the
contrary, it is law and a central government that are lacking, since
independence exists for external as for internal affairs.  The stage
we have reached in the affairs of Europe corresponds to the stage
reached in our internal affairs during the Wars of the Roses, when
turbulent barons frustrated the attempt to make them keep the king's
peace.  Thus, although the goal is the same in the two cases, the
steps to be taken in order to achieve it are quite different.

There can be no good international system until the boundaries of
states coincide as nearly as possible with the boundaries of nations.

But it is not easy to say what we mean by a nation.  Are the Irish a
nation?  Home Rulers say yes, Unionists say no.  Are the Ulstermen a
nation?  Unionists say yes, Home Rulers say no.  In all such cases it
is a party question whether we are to call a group a nation or not.  A
German will tell you that the Russian Poles are a nation, but as for
the Prussian Poles, they, of course, are part of Prussia.  Professors
can always be hired to prove, by arguments of race or language or
history, that a group about which there is a dispute is, or is not, a
nation, as may be desired by those whom the professors serve.  If we
are to avoid all these controversies, we must first of all endeavor to
find some definition of a nation.

A nation is not to be defined by affinities of language or a common
historical origin, though these things often help to produce a nation.
Switzerland is a nation, despite diversities of race, religion, and
language.  England and Scotland now form one nation, though they did
not do so at the time of the Civil War.  This is shown by Cromwell's
saying, in the height of the conflict, that he would rather be subject
to the domain of the royalists than to that of the Scotch.  Great
Britain was one state before it was one nation; on the other hand,
Germany was one nation before it was one state.

What constitutes a nation is a sentiment and an instinct, a sentiment
of similarity and an instinct of belonging to the same group or herd.
The instinct is an extension of the instinct which constitutes a flock
of sheep, or any other group of gregarious animals.  The sentiment
which goes with this is like a milder and more extended form of family
feeling.  When we return to England after being on the Continent, we
feel something friendly in the familiar ways, and it is easy to
believe that Englishmen on the whole are virtuous, while many
foreigners are full of designing wickedness.

Such feelings make it easy to organize a nation into a state.  It is
not difficult, as a rule, to acquiesce in the orders of a national
government.  We feel that it is our government, and that its decrees
are more or less the same as those which we should have given if we
ourselves had been the governors.  There is an instinctive and usually
unconscious sense of a common purpose animating the members of a
nation.  This becomes especially vivid when there is war or a danger
of war.  Any one who, at such a time, stands out against the orders of
his government feels an inner conflict quite different from any that
he would feel in standing out against the orders of a foreign
government in whose power he might happen to find himself.  If he
stands out, he does so with some more or less conscious hope that his
government may in time come to think as he does; whereas, in standing
out against a foreign government, no such hope is necessary.  This
group instinct, however it may have arisen, is what constitutes a
nation, and what makes it important that the boundaries of nations
should also be the boundaries of states.

National sentiment is a fact, and should be taken account of by
institutions.  When it is ignored, it is intensified and becomes a
source of strife.  It can only be rendered harmless by being given
free play, so long as it is not predatory.  But it is not, in itself,
a good or admirable feeling.  There is nothing rational and nothing
desirable in a limitation of sympathy which confines it to a fragment
of the human race.  Diversities of manners and customs and traditions
are, on the whole, a good thing, since they enable different nations
to produce different types of excellence.  But in national feeling
there is always latent or explicit an element of hostility to
foreigners.  National feeling, as we know it, could not exist in a
nation which was wholly free from external pressure of a hostile kind.

And group feeling produces a limited and often harmful kind of
morality.  Men come to identify the good with what serves the
interests of their own group, and the bad with what works against
those interests, even if it should happen to be in the interests of
mankind as a whole.  This group morality is very much in evidence
during war, and is taken for granted in men's ordinary thought.
Although almost all Englishmen consider the defeat of Germany
desirable for the good of the world, yet nevertheless most of them
honor a German for fighting for his country, because it has not
occurred to them that his actions ought to be guided by a morality
higher than that of the group.

A man does right, as a rule, to have his thoughts more occupied with
the interests of his own nation than with those of others, because his
actions are more likely to affect his own nation.  But in time of war,
and in all matters which are of equal concern to other nations and to
his own, a man ought to take account of the universal welfare, and not
allow his survey to be limited by the interest, or supposed interest,
of his own group or nation.

So long as national feeling exists, it is very important that each
nation should be self-governing as regards its internal affairs.
Government can only be carried on by force and tyranny if its subjects
view it with hostile eyes, and they will so view it if they feel that
it belongs to an alien nation.  This principle meets with difficulties
in cases where men of different nations live side by side in the same
area, as happens in some parts of the Balkans.  There are also
difficulties in regard to places which, for some geographical reason,
are of great international importance, such as the Suez Canal and the
Panama Canal.  In such cases the purely local desires of the
inhabitants may have to give way before larger interests.  But in
general, at any rate as applied to civilized communities, the
principle that the boundaries of nations ought to coincide with the
boundaries of states has very few exceptions.

This principle, however, does not decide how the relations between
states are to be regulated, or how a conflict of interests between
rival states is to be decided.  At present, every great state claims
absolute sovereignty, not only in regard to its internal affairs but
also in regard to its external actions.  This claim to absolute
sovereignty leads it into conflict with similar claims on the part of
other great states.  Such conflicts at present can only be decided by
war or diplomacy, and diplomacy is in essence nothing but the threat
of war.  There is no more justification for the claim to absolute
sovereignty on the part of a state than there would be for a similar
claim on the part of an individual.  The claim to absolute sovereignty
is, in effect, a claim that all external affairs are to be regulated
purely by force, and that when two nations or groups of nations are
interested in a question, the decision shall depend solely upon which
of them is, or is believed to be, the stronger.  This is nothing but
primitive anarchy, "the war of all against all," which Hobbes asserted
to be the original state of mankind.

There cannot be secure peace in the world, or any decision of
international questions according to international law, until states
are willing to part with their absolute sovereignty as regards their
external relations, and to leave the decision in such matters to some
international instrument of government.[5]  An international government
will have to be legislative as well as judicial.  It is not enough
that there should be a Hague tribunal, deciding matters according to
some already existing system of international law; it is necessary
also that there should be a body capable of enacting international
law, and this body will have to have the power of transferring
territory from one state to another, when it is persuaded that
adequate grounds exist for such a transference.  Friends of peace will
make a mistake if they unduly glorify the status quo.  Some nations
grow, while others dwindle; the population of an area may change its
character by emigration and immigration.  There is no good reason why
states should resent changes in their boundaries under such
conditions, and if no international authority has power to make
changes of this kind, the temptations to war will sometimes become
irresistible.

[5] For detailed scheme of international government see "International
Government," by L. Woolf. Allen & Unwin.

The international authority ought to possess an army and navy, and
these ought to be the only army and navy in existence.  The only
legitimate use of force is to diminish the total amount of force
exercised in the world.  So long as men are free to indulge their
predatory instincts, some men or groups of men will take advantage of
this freedom for oppression and robbery.  Just as the police are
necessary to prevent the use of force by private citizens, so an
international police will be necessary to prevent the lawless use of
force by separate states.

But I think it is reasonable to hope that if ever an international
government, possessed of the only army and navy in the world, came
into existence, the need of force to enact obedience to its decisions
would be very temporary.  In a short time the benefits resulting from
the substitution of law for anarchy would become so obvious that the
international government would acquire an unquestioned authority, and
no state would dream of rebelling against its decisions.  As soon as
this stage had been reached, the international army and navy would
become unnecessary.

We have still a very long road to travel before we arrive at the
establishment of an international authority, but it is not very
difficult to foresee the steps by which this result will be gradually
reached.  There is likely to be a continual increase in the practice
of submitting disputes to arbitration, and in the realization that the
supposed conflicts of interest between different states are mainly
illusory.  Even where there is a real conflict of interest, it must in
time become obvious that neither of the states concerned would suffer
as much by giving way as by fighting.  With the progress of
inventions, war, when it does occur, is bound to become increasingly
destructive.  The civilized races of the world are faced with the
alternative of coöperation or mutual destruction.  The present war
is making this alternative daily more evident.  And it is difficult to
believe that, when the enmities which it has generated have had time
to cool, civilized men will deliberately choose to destroy
civilization, rather than acquiesce in the abolition of war.

The matters in which the interests of nations are supposed to clash
are mainly three: tariffs, which are a delusion; the exploitation of
inferior races, which is a crime; pride of power and dominion, which
is a schoolboy folly.

The economic argument against tariffs is familiar, and I shall not
repeat it.  The only reason why it fails to carry conviction is the
enmity between nations.  Nobody proposes to set up a tariff between
England and Scotland, or between Lancashire and Yorkshire.  Yet the
arguments by which tariffs between nations are supported might be used
just as well to defend tariffs between counties.  Universal free trade
would indubitably be of economic benefit to mankind, and would be
adopted to-morrow if it were not for the hatred and suspicion which
nations feel one toward another.  From the point of view of preserving
the peace of the world, free trade between the different civilized
states is not so important as the open door in their dependencies.
The desire for exclusive markets is one of the most potent causes of
war.

Exploiting what are called "inferior races" has become one of the main
objects of European statecraft.  It is not only, or primarily, trade
that is desired, but opportunities for investment; finance is more
concerned in the matter than industry.  Rival diplomatists are very
often the servants, conscious or unconscious, of rival groups of
financiers.  The financiers, though themselves of no particular
nation, understand the art of appealing to national prejudice, and of
inducing the taxpayer to incur expenditure of which they reap the
benefit.  The evils which they produce at home, and the devastation
that they spread among the races whom they exploit, are part of the
price which the world has to pay for its acquiescence in the
capitalist régime.

But neither tariffs nor financiers would be able to cause serious
trouble, if it were not for the sentiment of national pride.  National
pride might be on the whole beneficent, if it took the direction of
emulation in the things that are important to civilization.  If we
prided ourselves upon our poets, our men of science, or the justice
and humanity of our social system, we might find in national pride a
stimulus to useful endeavors.  But such matters play a very small
part.  National pride, as it exists now, is almost exclusively
concerned with power and dominion, with the extent of territory that a
nation owns, and with its capacity for enforcing its will against the
opposition of other nations.  In this it is reinforced by group
morality.  To nine citizens out of ten it seems self-evident, whenever
the will of their own nation clashes with that of another, that their
own nation must be in the right.  Even if it were not in the right on
the particular issue, yet it stands in general for so much nobler
ideals than those represented by the other nation to the dispute, that
any increase in its power is bound to be for the good of mankind.
Since all nations equally believe this of themselves, all are equally
ready to insist upon the victory of their own side in any dispute in
which they believe that they have a good hope of victory.  While this
temper persists, the hope of international coöperation must remain
dim.

If men could divest themselves of the sentiment of rivalry and
hostility between different nations, they would perceive that the
matters in which the interests of different nations coincide
immeasurably outweigh those in which they clash; they would perceive,
to begin with, that trade is not to be compared to warfare; that the
man who sells you goods is not doing you an injury.  No one considers
that the butcher and the baker are his enemies because they drain him
of money.  Yet as soon as goods come from a foreign country, we are
asked to believe that we suffer a terrible injury in purchasing them.
No one remembers that it is by means of goods exported that we
purchase them.  But in the country to which we export, it is the goods
we send which are thought dangerous, and the goods we buy are
forgotten.  The whole conception of trade, which has been forced upon
us by manufacturers who dreaded foreign competition, by trusts which
desired to secure monopolies, and by economists poisoned by the virus
of nationalism, is totally and absolutely false.  Trade results simply
from division of labor.  A man cannot himself make all the goods of
which he has need, and therefore he must exchange his produce with
that of other people.  What applies to the individual, applies in
exactly the same way to the nation.  There is no reason to desire that
a nation should itself produce all the goods of which it has need; it
is better that it should specialize upon those goods which it can
produce to most advantage, and should exchange its surplus with the
surplus of other goods produced by other countries.  There is no use
in sending goods out of the country except in order to get other goods
in return.  A butcher who is always willing to part with his meat but
not willing to take bread from the baker, or boots from the bootmaker,
or clothes from the tailor, would soon find himself in a sorry plight.
Yet he would be no more foolish than the protectionist who desires
that we should send goods abroad without receiving payment in the
shape of goods imported from abroad.

The wage system has made people believe that what a man needs is work.
This, of course, is absurd.  What he needs is the goods produced by
work, and the less work involved in making a given amount of goods,
the better.  But owing to our economic system, every economy in
methods of production enables employers to dismiss some of their
employees, and to cause destitution, where a better system would
produce only an increase of wages or a diminution in the hours of work
without any corresponding diminution of wages.

Our economic system is topsyturvy.  It makes the interest of the
individual conflict with the interest of the community in a thousand
ways in which no such conflict ought to exist.  Under a better system
the benefits of free trade and the evils of tariffs would be obvious
to all.

Apart from trade, the interests of nations coincide in all that makes
what we call civilization.  Inventions and discoveries bring benefit
to all.  The progress of science is a matter of equal concern to the
whole civilized world.  Whether a man of science is an Englishman, a
Frenchman, or a German is a matter of no real importance.  His
discoveries are open to all, and nothing but intelligence is required
in order to profit by them.  The whole world of art and literature and
learning is international; what is done in one country is not done for
that country, but for mankind.  If we ask ourselves what are the
things that raise mankind above the brutes, what are the things that
make us think the human race more valuable than any species of
animals, we shall find that none of them are things in which any one
nation can have exclusive property, but all are things in which the
whole world can share.  Those who have any care for these things,
those who wish to see mankind fruitful in the work which men alone can
do, will take little account of national boundaries, and have little
care to what state a man happens to owe allegiance.

The importance of international coöperation outside the sphere of
politics has been brought home to me by my own experience.  Until
lately I was engaged in teaching a new science which few men in the
world were able to teach.  My own work in this science was based
chiefly upon the work of a German and an Italian.  My pupils came from
all over the civilized world: France, Germany, Austria, Russia,
Greece, Japan, China, India, and America.  None of us was conscious of
any sense of national divisions.  We felt ourselves an outpost of
civilization, building a new road into the virgin forest of the
unknown.  All coöperated in the common task, and in the interest of
such a work the political enmities of nations seemed trivial,
temporary, and futile.

But it is not only in the somewhat rarefied atmosphere of abstruse
science that international coöperation is vital to the progress of
civilization.  All our economic problems, all the questions of
securing the rights of labor, all the hopes of freedom at home and
humanity abroad, rest upon the creation of international good-will.

So long as hatred, suspicion, and fear dominate the feelings of men
toward each other, so long we cannot hope to escape from the tyranny
of violence and brute force.  Men must learn to be conscious of the
common interests of mankind in which all are at one, rather than of
those supposed interests in which the nations are divided.  It is not
necessary, or even desirable, to obliterate the differences of manners
and custom and tradition between different nations.  These differences
enable each nation to make its own distinctive contribution to the sum
total of the world's civilization.

What is to be desired is not cosmopolitanism, not the absence of all
national characteristics that one associates with couriers,
wagon-lit attendants, and others, who have had everything
distinctive obliterated by multiple and trivial contacts with men of
every civilized country.  Such cosmopolitanism is the result of loss,
not gain.  The international spirit which we should wish to see
produced will be something added to love of country, not something
taken away.  Just as patriotism does not prevent a man from feeling
family affection, so the international spirit ought not to prevent a
man from feeling affection for his own country.  But it will somewhat
alter the character of that affection.  The things which he will
desire for his own country will no longer be things which can only be
acquired at the expense of others, but rather those things in which
the excellence of any one country is to the advantage of all the
world.  He will wish his own country to be great in the arts of peace,
to be eminent in thought and science, to be magnanimous and just and
generous.  He will wish it to help mankind on the way toward that
better world of liberty and international concord which must be
realized if any happiness is to be left to man.  He will not desire
for his country the passing triumphs of a narrow possessiveness, but
rather the enduring triumph of having helped to embody in human
affairs something of that spirit of brotherhood which Christ taught
and which the Christian churches have forgotten.  He will see that
this spirit embodies not only the highest morality, but also the
truest wisdom, and the only road by which the nations, torn and
bleeding with the wounds which scientific madness has inflicted, can
emerge into a life where growth is possible and joy is not banished at
the frenzied call of unreal and fictitious duties.  Deeds inspired by
hate are not duties, whatever pain and self-sacrifice they may
involve.  Life and hope for the world are to be found only in the
deeds of love.


The U.S. government's secret spy court authorized under the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act is used by intelligence agencies (CIA, FBI,
NSA, etc) to obtain authorization to electronically spy on foreign powers and
their agents within the United States.

    The Act requires a minimization procedure to be followed with respect to
information obtained on U.S. persons in the course of the surveillance.  When
a law enforcement agency seeks to electronically surveil a suspected criminal
they are required to demonstrate probable cause that a crime has been or will
be committed in order to obtain a search warrant.  However, for an
intelligence agency to obtain a warrant from the United States Foreign
Intelligence Court (USFISC), they only need to demonstrate probable cause
that the target is a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power.  That is
to obtain a warrant in a normal Federal or State Court, there must be
evidence of a crime, but to obtain a warrant in the USFISC there merely needs
to be an indication that the target might be associated with a certain class
of people.

    To "protect" U.S. persons a minimization procedure is employed with
respect to the disclosure of information obtained during the surveillance of
foreign powers and their agents.  Full Disclosure has obtained a copy of a
FBI warrant application filed with the USFISC which details the actual
minimization procedure.  According to the application's Exhibit A which
details the procedure:

	    These procedures apply to the acquisition,
	    retention, and dissemination of nonpublicly
	    available communications and other information
	    concerning unconsenting United States persons
	    that is collected in the course of electronic
	    surveillance directed at the telephone
	    communications of this agent of a foreign power
	    and oral communications of this agent of a
	    foreign power...
	
    When the FBI begins the surveillance, they will verify that the telephone
communications lines being intercepted at the residence and business are in
fact the telephone lines of the agent of the foreign power.

    The FBI agents who monitor the communications are responsible for
determining if the information "intercepted must be minimized". Further, the
communications of United States persons (this includes discussions of U.S.
persons by foreign powers) will be subject to "continuing analysis to
establish categories of communications that are not pertinent to the
authorized purpose of the surveillance".  The categories are to be
established after a reasonable period of monitoring the communications of the
foreign power.  No information was provided which would indicate that
information categorized as not pertinent would be stored, processed or
disseminated any differently than pertinent information.

    Access to information obtained regarding United States persons is to be
under strict controls.  Use of the information is restricted to FBI
supervisory, investigative, and clerical personnel who have a need to know
the information for "foreign intelligence or law enforcement" purposes.  Any
information which contains evidence of a criminal offense is retained until a
decision is rendered by prosecutive officials, and if the United States
person is prosecuted the information will be retained until the end of the
prosecution.

    To further "protect" United States persons information regarding them
won't be disseminated without their consent, unless the information is
"evidence of a crime which has been, is being, or is about to be committed".
Such information can be disseminated to "Federal, state, local, or foreign
officials or agencies with law enforcement responsibility for the crime".
Information regarding U.S. persons which is not evidence of a crime, but
which reasonably appears to be foreign intelligence information can be
disseminated in a "manner which identifies United States persons only for
authorized foreign intelligence, foreign counterintelligence,
countersabotage, and international terrorism, or law enforcement purposes".

    So far, there is little minimization (or protection) of information
regarding United States persons which was obtained in a manner inconsistant
with the Fourth Amendment warrant requirements.  The last sentence of the
Exhibit appears to set forth the only protection afforded the United States
person:

	
	    Any information acquired from electronic
	    surveillance of the target of a foreign power
	    which is disseminated for law enforcement
	    purposes shall be accompanied by a statement
	    that such information or any information
	    derived therefrom, may only be used in a
	    criminal proceeding with the advance
	    authorization of the Attorney General.

    Prior to the passage of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, George
Hasen, Chairman of the Committee on Civil Rights wrote a letter to Senator
Inouye outlining this very problem.  The text of his letter follows:

    Dear Senator Inouye: We understand that your Committee has received from
the Committee on Federal Legislation of the Association of the Bar of the
City of New York its critique of the provisions of the proposed Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1977 (S. 1506).  Our Committee on Civil
Rights associates itself, generally, with that critique, but we disagree with
it in one important respect.

    Both the Committee on Federal Legislation and the Committee on Civil
Rights are concerned because the standards imposed by S. 1566 for obtaining a
warrant to engage in electronic surveillance do not, in some instances,
require a probable cause showing of criminal conduct.  It is the considered
judgment of the Committee on Civil Rights that a CRIMINAL STANDARD IS
ESSENTIAL to the bill and, unlike the Committee on Federal Legislation, we
believe that unless S. 1566 is amended to provide such a standard, it should
not be enacted.

    We think that is important to remember why this legislation is needed.
Clearly it is not needed to empower government agencies to carry on
electronic surveillance.  Rather, the need is for legislation which will
limit and control electronic surveillance and the consequent government
intrusion into the private lives of American Citizens.  The findings of
Congressional committees which over the last several years have investigated
intelligence agency abuses HAVE MADE THIS ABUNDANTLY CLEAR.  Based on such
findings, the Church Committee specifically concluded that no American should
"be targeted for electronic surveillance except upon a judicial finding of
probable criminal activity" and, further, that targeting "an American for
electronic surveillance in the absence of probable cause to believe he might
commit a crime, is unwise and unnecessary."  (Intelligence Activities and the
Rights of Americans, Final Report of the Select Committee to Study
Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, U.S. Senate,
94th Cong., 2nd Sess. (1976), at 325.)

    Further the Supreme Court has warned of the danger to First Amendment
rights inherent in national security surveillances:

    "National security cases . . . often reflect a convergence of First and
Fourth Amendment values not present in cases of `ordinary' crime.  Though the
investigative duty of the executive may be stronger in such cases, so also is
there greater jeopardy to constitutionally protected speech.  `Historically
the struggle for freedom of speech and press in England was bound up with the
issue of the scope of the search and seizure power,' Marcus v. Search
Warrant, 367 U.S. 717, 724 (1961).  History abundantly documents the tendency
of Government -- however benevolent and benign its motives -- to view with
suspicion those who most fervently dispute it policies.  Fourth Amendment
protections become the more necessary when the targets of official
surveillance may be those suspected of unorthodoxy in their political
beliefs.  The danger to political dissent is acute where the Government
attempts to act under so vague a concept as the power to protect `domestic
security.'  Given the difficulty of defining the domestic security interest,
the danger of abuse in acting to protect that interest becomes apparent.'
United States v. United States District Court, 407 U.S. 297, 313 (1971).

    Notwithstanding these warnings, S. 1566 would permit the electronic
surveillance of United States citizens and other persons for 90 days or more
without any showing that they are engaged in, or likely to be engaged in,
criminal activity.  Section 2521(b)(2)(B)(iv)/1 would go even further and
would permit the electronic surveillance of individuals who "knowingly" aid
and abet persons whose conduct may be entirely lawful.

    Surely, the burden of justifying such a departure from basic Fourth
Amendment principles -- if indeed it can be justified -- ought to be on the
proponents of such provisions.  And, surely, they ought to be able to specify
precisely those lawful activities of American citizens which are so vital to
the safety of the nation that the Government must be permitted to
surreptitiously gather information about them and, worse, to do so by such an
intrusive method as electronic surveillance.  In our opinion, however, two
Attorneys General have been unable to sustain that burden, and the few
examples are simply unconvincing.  In our view, the necessity of a
non-criminal standard has not been demonstrated, and it should, therefore, be
rejected.

    There is another and perhaps even more important reason why such a
standard should not be accepted.  If, in this first legislative attempt to
control searches in national security matters, Congress authorizes the most
intrusive and least precise of techniques -- electronic surveillance -- where
no crime is involved, what justification will there be for barring in similar
situations more specific methods such as surreptitious entry and mail
openings?  And if a non-criminal standard is necessary to protect the
national security where the connection with a foreign power can be as tenuous
as that provided in S. 1566, what arguments can be made against a similar
standard in domestic situations where the perceived danger to national
security may be just as great?


     Thank you for being here today.  A better future for your
generation -- a better life for all who
will work for it -- is what this campaign is about.

     But I come here today convinced that your future -- the very
future of our country -- the
American Dream -- is in peril.  This country is in trouble.  As
I've travelled around this country, I've
seen too much pain on people's faces, too much fear in people's
eyes.  We've got to do better.  

     This month, I visited with a couple from New Hampshire named
David and Rita Springs.  He's
a chemical engineer by training; she's studying to be a lab
technician.  They told me that a month before
his pension was vested, the people who ran his company fired him to
cut their payrolls.  Then they
turned around and sold the company, and bailed out with a golden
parachute while David Springs and
his family got the shaft. 

     Last week, at a bowling alley in Manchester, I met a fireman
who was working two jobs and his
wife who was working 50 hours a week in a mill.  They told me they
were worried that even though
both of them were working like this and their son was a straight A
student, they still wouldn't be able to
afford to send him to college because of the rising cost of college
education and because they were too
well-off to get government help.

     At a breakfast in a cafe in New Hampshire, I met a young man
whose 12-year-old child had had
open-heart surgery, and now no one will hire him because they can't
afford his health insurance.

     The families I met are from New Hampshire, but they could be
from anywhere in America. 
They're the backbone of the country, the ones who do the work and
pay the taxes and send their children
off to war.  They're a lot like people I've seen in Arkansas for
years, living with the real consequences
of our national neglect.  These are the real victims of the Reagan
Revolution, the Bush Succession, and
this awful national recession.

     During this administration, the economy has grown more slowly
and fewer jobs have been
created than in any administration since World War II.  People who
have jobs are working longer hours
for less money; people who don't are looking harder to find less. 
Middle-class people are paying more
for health care, housing, education, and taxes, when government
services have been cut.

     And as these hard-working middle-class families look to their
President to make good on his
promises, his answer to them is:  Tough luck.  It's your fault.  Go
buy a house or a car.

     Just this week, George Bush said we don't need a plan to end
this recession -- that if we wait
long enough, our problems will go away.  Well, he's right about
that part:  If he doesn't have a plan to
turn this country around by November of 1992, we're going to lay
George Bush off, put America back
to work, and our problems will go away.

     We need a President who will take responsibility for getting
this country moving again.  A
President who will provide the leadership to pull us together and
challenge our nation to compete in the
world and win again.  

     Ten years ago, America had the highest wages in the world. 
Now we're 10th, and falling.  Last
year, Germany and Japan had productivity growth rates three and
four times ours because they educate
their people better, invest more in their future, and organize
their economies for global competition and
we don't.

     For 12 years of this Reagan-Bush era, the Republicans have let
S&L crooks and self-serving
CEOs try to build an economy out of paper and perks instead of
people and products.  It's the
Republican way:  every man for himself and get it while you can. 
They stacked the odds in favor of
their friends at the top, and told everybody else to wait for
whatever trickled down.

     And every step of the way, the Republicans forgot about the
very people they had promised to
help -- the very people who elected them in the first place -- the
forgotten middle class Americans who
still live by American values and whose hopes, hearts, and hands
still carry the American Dream.

     But Democrats forgot about real people, too.  

     Democrats in Congress joined the White House in tripling the
national debt and raising the
deficit to the point of paralysis. Democrats and Republicans in
Congress joined the White House on the
sidelines, cheering on an S&L boom until it went bust to the tune
of $500 billion.

     For too many Americans, for too long, it's seemed that
Congress and the White House have
been more interested in looking out for themselves and for their
friends, but not for the country and not
for the people who make it great.

     And, now, after 12 years of Reagan-Bush, the forgotten middle
class is discovering that the
reward for 12 years of sacrifice and hard work is more sacrifice
and more hard times:  They've paid
higher taxes on lower incomes for service cuts, while the rich got
tax cuts, while poverty increased, and
the President and Congress got pay raises and health insurance.

     We've got to move in a radically different direction.  The
Republicans' failed experiment in
supply-side economics doesn't produce growth.  It doesn't create
upward mobility.  And most important,
it doesn't prepare millions and millions of Americans to compete
and win in the new world economy.

     And we've got to move away from the old Democratic theory that
says we can just tax and
spend our way out of any problem we face.  Expanding government
doesn't expand opportunity.  And
big deficits don't produce sustained economic growth, especially
when the borrowed money is spent on
yesterday's mistakes, not tomorrow's investments.
  
     Stale theories produce nothing but stalemate.  The old
economic answers are obsolete.  We've
seen the limits of Keynesian economics.  We've seen the worst of
supply-side economics.  We need a
new approach.  

     For 12 years, we've had no economic vision, no economic
leadership, no national economic
strategy.  What America needs is a President with a radical new
approach to our economic problems that
will give new life to the American Dream.

     We need a New Covenant for economic change, a new economics
that empowers people,
rewards work, and organizes America to compete and win again.  A
national economic strategy to
liberate and energize the abilities of millions of Americans who
are paying more taxes when the
government is doing less for them, who are working harder while
their wages go down.

     This New Covenant isn't liberal or conservative.  It's both
and it's different.  The American
people don't care about the idle rhetoric of left and right. 
They're real people, with real problems, and
they think no one in Washington wants to solve their problems or
stand up for them.  

     The goals of our New Covenant for economic change are
straightforward:

     o We need a President who will put economic opportunity in the
hands of ordinary people, not
rich and powerful special interests;
     o A President who will revolutionize government to invest more
in the future; 
     o A President who will encourage the private sector to
organize in new ways and cooperate to
produce economic growth;
     o A President who will challenge and lead America to compete
and win in the global economy,
not retreat from the world; 

     That's how we'll turn this country's economy around, recapture
America's leadership in the
world, and build a better future for our children.  That's how
we'll show the forgotten middle class we
really understand their struggle.  That's how we'll reduce poverty
and rebuild the ladder from poverty to
the middle class.  And that, my friends, is why I'm running for
President of the United States.

     Our first responsibility under this New Covenant is to move
quickly to put this recession behind
us.  Last week, I released a plan for what I would do right away to
help working people and get the
economy moving again.  I'd not only extend unemployment benefits,
as Congress and the President have
finally done, but I'd push through a middle-class tax cut, an
accelerated highway bill to create 40-45,000
new construction jobs over the next six months, and an increase in
the ceiling on FHA mortgage
guarantee so half a million families could pump up the economy by
buying their first home.  I do think
good credit card customers should receive a break from the 18 and
19 percent rates of banks, which
have cut the rates the customers get paid on their deposit
accounts.  And I'm proud to say that four of
the ten banks charging the lowest credit card rates nationwide are
in my state.  

     I would also make sure federal regulators send a clear signal
to the financial community not to
call in loans that are performing, and not to fear making good
loans to local businesses.

     But even if we did all those things tomorrow, it wouldn't
change the fundamental challenge of
the 1990s.  We need to get out of this recession, and soon.  But we
also need a long-term national
strategy to create a high-wage, high-growth, high-opportunity
economy, not a hard-work, low-wage
economy that's sinking when it ought to be rising.  

     It doesn't have to be that way.  I believe we can win again. 
In the global economy of the 1990s,
economic growth won't come from government spending.  It will come
instead from individuals working
smarter and learning more, from entrepreneurs taking more risks and
going after new markets, and from
corporations designing better products and taking a longer view. 
We're going to reward work, expand
opportunity, empower people, and we are going to win again. 



EMPOWERING EVERY AMERICAN

     There are two reasons why middle-class people today are
working harder for less pay.  First,
their taxes have gone up -- but that's only 30% of their problem. 
The other 70% of the problem is
America's loss of economic growth and world economic leadership.

     If we're going to turn this country around, we've not only got
to liberate ordinary people from
unfair taxes, we've got to empower every American with the
education and training essential to get
ahead.

     Let me make this clear:  Education is economic development. 
We can only be a high-wage,
high-growth country if we are a high-skills country.  In a world in
which money and production are
mobile, the only way middle-class people can keep good jobs with
growing incomes is to be lifetime
learners and innovators.  Without world-class skills, the middle
class will surely continue to decline. 
With them, middle-class workers will generate more high-wage jobs
in America in the '90s.

     Empowering everybody begins with preschool for every child who
needs it, and fully funding
Head Start.  It includes a national examination system to push our
students to meet world-class standards
in core subjects like math and science, and an annual report card
for every state, every school district,
and every school to measure our progress in meeting those
standards.

     Empowerment means training young people for high-wage jobs,
not dead-end ones. Young
Americans with only a high school education make 25 percent less
today than they would have 15 years
ago. In a Clinton Administration we'll have a national
apprenticeship program that will enable high
school students who aren't bound for college to enter a course of
study, designed by schools and local
businesses, to teach them valuable skills, with a promise of a real
job with growing incomes when they
graduate.

     Empowerment means challenging our students and every American
with a system of voluntary
national service. In a Clinton Administration we will offer a
domestic GI Bill that will say to middle
class as well as low income people: We want you to go to college
and we're glad to pay for it, but
you've got to give something back to your country in return.  As
President, I'll ask Congress to establish
a trust fund out of which any American can borrow money for a
college education, so long as they pay it
back either as a small percentage of their income over time or with
a couple of years of national service
as teachers, police officers, child care workers -- doing work our
country urgently needs.  The fund
would be financed with a portion of the peace dividend and by
redirecting the present student loan
program, which is nowhere near as cost-effective as it should be. 
This program will pay for itself many
times over.  

     But in an era when what you can earn depends largely on what
you can learn, education can't
stop at the schoolhouse door.  From now on, anyone who's willing to
work will have a chance to learn. 
In a Clinton Administration, we'll make adult literacy programs
available to all who need it, by working
with states to make sure every state has a clear, achievable plan
to teach everyone with a job to read, to
give them a chance to earn a GED, and wherever possible, to do it
where they work.  In Arkansas we
had 14,000 people in adult education programs in 1983.  Today we
have over 50,000.  By 1993, we'll
have over 70,000.  Every state can do the same for a modest cost
with a disciplined plan and a flexible
delivery system.

     And we will ensure that every working American has the
opportunity to learn new skills every
year.  Today, American business spends billions of dollars on
training -- the equivalent of 1.5 percent of
the costs of their payrolls -- but 70 percent of it goes to the 10
percent at the top of the ladder.  In a
Clinton Administration, we'll require employers to offer every
worker his or her share of those training
dollars, or contribute the equivalent to a national training fund. 
Workers will get the training they need,
and companies will learn that the more you train your workers, the
more your profits increase. 

     We need special efforts to empower the poor to work their way
out of poverty.  We'll make
work pay by expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit for the working
poor, and by supporting private
and public partnerships to give low-income entrepreneurs the tools
to start new businesses, through
innovative institutions like Shore Bank in Chicago and its rural
counterpart, the Southern Development
Bancorporation in Arkansas.  We've got to break the cycle of
dependency and put an end to permanent
dependence on welfare as a way of life, by really investing in the
development of poor people and giving
them the means, the incentives, and the requirement to go to work. 
  

     Finally, empowering working Americans means letting them keep
more of what they earn. 
Ronald Reagan and George Bush raised taxes on the middle class. I'm
going to cut them. In a Clinton
Administration, we'll cut income tax rates on the middle class:  an
average family's tax bill will go
down 10 percent, a savings of $350 a year.  And the deficit won't
go up -- instead, those earning over
$200,000 a year will pay more, though still a smaller percentage of
their incomes than they paid in the
'70s, not to soak the rich but to return to basic fairness. 


A REVOLUTION IN GOVERNMENT

     Besides empowering citizens, we must lead a revolution in
government so it becomes an engine
of opportunity again, not an obstacle to it.  Voters who went to
the polls in this month's elections sent us
a clear message:  People want more for their money.  The experts in
Washington think that is a
contradiction. But I think the experts are wrong and the people are
right.  People want a better deal from
government, and they'll get it in a Clinton Administration.

     Too many Washington insiders of both parties think the only
way to provide more services is to
spend more on programs already on the books in education, housing,
and health care.  But if we reinvent
government to deliver new services in different ways, eliminate
unnecessary layers of management, and
offer people more choices, we really can give taxpayers more
services with fewer bureaucrats for the
same or less money. 

     Every successful major corporation in America had to
restructure itself to compete in the last
decade, to decentralize, become more entrepreneurial, give workers
more authority to make decisions,
and offer customers more choices and better products. 

     That's what we're trying to do in Arkansas -- balancing the
budget every year, improving
services, and treating taxpayers like our customers and our bosses,
because they are.  Arkansas was the
first state to initiate a statewide total quality management
program.  We've dramatically reduced the
number of reports the Department of Education requires of school
districts, slashed bureaucratic costs in
the Department of Human Services and put the money into direct
services that help real people, and
speeded up customer services in the Revenue Department.  We measure
the job placement rate of
graduates from vocational-technical programs, and if a program
can't show results, we shut it down.

     So I know it can be done.  But let us be clear:  Serious
restructuring of government for greater
productivity is very different from the traditional top-down
reorganization plans that have been offered
over the last 20 years, including in this campaign.  Those require
a lot of time and energy and generally
leave us with more of the same government, not less.  

     What I am proposing is hard, unglamorous work.  It will
require us to reexamine every dollar of
the taxpayers' money we spend and every minute of time that the
government puts in on business.  It
will require us to enlist the energies of front-line public
servants who are often as frustrated as the rest
of us with bureaucracy.  And if we do it in Arkansas, which has
among the lowest taxes in the country,
imagine how much more important and productive it will be at the
federal level.  In a Clinton
Administration, we'll make government more effective by holding
ourselves to the same standard of
productivity growth as business and insisting on 3%
across-the-board cuts in the administrative costs of
the federal bureaucracy every year.  

     If we're going to get more for our money, we ought to have a
federal budget which invests more
in the future and spends less on the present and the past.  As
President, I'll throw out last year's budget
deal, which brought us the biggest deficits in American history and
the fastest-growing spending since
World War II.  In its place, I'll establish a new three-part
federal budget:  a past budget for interest
payments; a present budget for spending on current consumption, and
a future budget for investments in
things that will make us richer. 

     Today the federal government spends only 9% of the budget on
investing in the future -- in
education, child health, environmental technology, infrastructure,
and basic research.  We'll double that
in a Clinton Administration.  We'll begin to finance the future
budget by converting resources no longer
needed for national defense to the investments needed to rebuild
our economic security, and by
controlling health care costs.  

     We can bring the deficit down over time, but only if we
control spending on current
consumption programs by tying overall increases to real revenue
increases, not estimates.  I propose to
limit overall increases in the consumption budget to increases in
personal income, so that the federal
budget can't go up any faster than the average American's paycheck. 
Making Congress and the
President live by this rule will cut the deficit drastically in
five years, in a dramatic budget reform.

     Finally, if we're serious about reinventing government, we
must reinvent the way we deliver
health care in this country.  We spend 30% more than any other
country on health care and do less with
it.  For many Americans, the rising cost of health care and the
loss of it is the number one fear they face
on a daily basis.  Thousands of American businesses are losing jobs
because health care costs are a 30%
handicap in the global marketplace.  Two-thirds of the strikes
today are about health care, and no matter
how they come out, both sides lose.  We are the only nation in the
world that doesn't help control health
care costs.

     We could cover every American with the money we're spending if
we had the courage to
demand insurance reform and slash health care bureaucracies, and if
we followed the lead of other
nations in controlling the unnecessary spread of technology,
stopping drug prices from going up three
times the rate of inflation, and forcing the people who send bills
and the people who pay them to agree
on how much health care should cost.  We don't need to reduce
quality; we need to restructure the
system.  And no nation has ever done it without a national
government that took the lead in controlling
costs and providing health care for all.

     In the first year of the Clinton Administration, Congress and
I will deliver quality, affordable
health care for all Americans.  


A REVOLUTION IN THE WORKPLACE

     These changes are vital, but American workers and American
businesses are going to have to
change too, the private sector is where the jobs are created.  Many
of the most urgent changes cannot be
legally mandated, but we know they're overdue after a decade in
which the stock market tripled and
average wages went down.

     Old economic arrangements are holding America back.  It's time
for a revolution in the
American workplace that will radically raise the status of the
American worker and tear down the Berlin
Wall between labor and management.
 
     It's been years since the U.S. could outproduce the rest of
the world by treating workers like so
many cogs in a machine.  We need a whole new organization of work,
where workers at the front lines
make decisions, not just follow orders, and entire levels of
bureaucratic middle management become
obsolete.  And we need a new style of management, where front-line
workers and managers have more
responsibility to make decisions that improve quality and increase
productivity.  

     Dynamic, flexible, well-trained workers who cooperate with
savvy, sensitive managers to make
changes every day are the keys to high growth in manufacturing and
in the service sector, including
government, education, and health care, areas where productivity
growth was very weak in the 1980s.

     Everyone will have to change, but everyone will get something
in return.  Workers will gain
new prosperity and independence, but they'll have to give up
non-productive work rules and rigid job
classifications and be more open to change.  Managers will reap
more profits but will have to manage
for the long-run, train all workers, and not treat themselves
better than their workers are treated. 
Corporations will reach new heights in productivity, growth and
profitability, but CEOs will have to put
the long-term interests of their workers, their customers, and
their companies first.    

     We should restore the link between pay and performance by
encouraging companies to provide
for employee ownership, profit-sharing for all employees, not just
executives.  And executives should
profit when their companies do.  We should all go up or down
together.  We'll say to America's
corporate leaders:  No more taking bonuses for yourselves if you
don't give bonuses to everybody.  And
no more golden parachutes if you don't make good severance packages
available for your workers.

     It's wrong for executives to do what so many did in the '80s. 
Executives at the biggest
companies raised their pay by four times the percentage their
workers' pay went up and three times the
percentage their profits went up.  It's wrong to drive a company
into the ground and have the boss bail
out with a golden parachute to a cushy life.

      The average CEO at a major American corporation is paid 85
times as much as the average
worker.  And our government today rewards that excess with a tax
break for executive pay, no matter
how high it is, or whether it reflects increased performance.  If
a company wants to overpay its
executives to perform less well, and underinvest in the future, it
shouldn't get any special treatment from
Uncle Sam.  

     If a company wants to transfer jobs abroad and cut the
security of working people, it shouldn't
get special treatment from the Treasury.  In the 1980s, we didn't
do enough to help our companies to
compete and win in a global economy.  We did too much to transfer
wealth away from hard-working
middle-class people to the rich without good reason and too much to
weaken our country with debt that
wasn't invested in America.  That's got to stop.  There should be
no more deductibility for
irresponsibility.

     I believe in business.  I believe in the marketplace.  I
believe that the best jobs program this
country will ever have is economic growth.  Most new jobs in this
country are created by small
businesses and entrepreneurs who get little help from the
government.  

     Too often, especially in this environment, banks and other
investors won't take a chance on good
ideas and good people. I want to encourage small business people
and entrepreneurs.  In a Clinton
Administration, we'll offer a tax incentive to those who take risks
by starting new businesses and
developing new technologies.  Instead of offering a capital gains
tax cut for the wealthy who will churn
stocks on Wall Street anyway, we'll put forth a new enterprise tax
cut that rewards those with the
patience, the courage, and the determination to create new jobs.
Those who risk their savings on new
businesses that create most of the jobs in the country will receive
a 50% tax exclusion for gains held
more than five years.   

     And I want to encourage investment here in America in other
ways -- by making the R&D tax
credit permanent, by taking away incentives for companies to shut
down their plants in the U.S. and
move their jobs overseas, and by offering a targeted investment tax
credit to medium and small-size
businesses who'll create new jobs with new plant and equipment.


A NEW STRATEGY TO COMPETE AND WIN

     Finally, we owe American workers, entrepreneurs, and industry
a pledge that all their hard work
will not go down the drain.  

     We must have a national strategy to compete and win in the
global economy.  The American
people aren't protectionists.  Protectionism is just a fancy word
for giving up; we want to compete and
win.  That is why our New Covenant must include a new trade policy
that says to Europe, Japan and our
other trading partners:  we favor an open trading system, but if
you won't play by those rules, we'll play
by yours.  That's why we need a stronger, sharper "Super 301" bill
as the means to enforce that policy.

     I supported fast track negotiations with Mexico for a free
trade agreement, but our negotiators
need to insist upon tough conditions that prevent our trading
partners from exploiting their workers or by
lowering costs through pollution to gain an advantage.  We should
seek out similar agreements with all
of Latin America, because rich countries will get richer by helping
other countries grow into strong
trading partners.

     We also need a new energy policy to lower the trade deficit,
increase productivity, and improve
the environment.  We must rely less on imported oil, and more on
cheap and abundant natural gas, and
on research and development into renewable energy resources.  We
must achieve European standards of
energy efficiency in factories and office buildings.  That will
free up billions of dollars to invest in the
American economy.

     If we want to help U.S. companies keep pace in the world
economy, we need to restore America
to the forefront not just in inventing products, but in bringing
them to market.  Too often, we have won
the battle of the patents but lost the war of creating jobs,
profits, and wealth.  American scientists
invented the microwave, the VCR, the color TV, and the memory chip,
and yet today the Koreans, the
Japanese, and other nations make most of those products.  

     The research and development arm of the Defense Department did
a great job of developing
products and taking them to production because we didn't want them
produced overseas.  We should
launch the civilian equivalent -- an agency to provide basic
research for new and critical technologies and
make it easier to move these ideas into the marketplace.  And we
can pledge right now that for every
dollar we reduce the defense budget on research and development,
we'll increase the civilian R&D
budget by the same amount.  We should commit ourselves to a
transitional plan for converting from a
defense to a domestic economy in a way that creates more high-wage
jobs, and doesn't destroy our most
successful high-wage industrial base, and with it the careers of
many thousands of our best scientists,
engineers, and workers.

     We must do all these things, and something more.  The economic
challenges we confront today
are not just a matter of statistics and numbers.  Behind them are
real human beings and real human
suffering.  I have seen the pain in the faces of unemployed workers
in New Hampshire, policemen in
New York and Texas, computer company executives in California,
middle-class people everywhere. 
They're all showing the same pain and worry I hear in the voices of
my own people in Arkansas,
including men and women I grew up with who played by the rules and
now see their dreams for the
future slipping away.

     That's why we're offering a new radical approach to economics. 
Economics as if people were
really important. If we offer these hard-working families no hope
for the future, no solutions to their
problems, no relief for their pain, then fear and insecurity will
grow, and the politics of hate and
division will spread.  If we do not act to bring this country
together in common cause to build a better
future, David Duke and his kind will be able to divide and destroy
our nation.  Our streets will get
meaner, our families will be devastated, and our very social fabric
-- our goodness and tolerance and
decency as a people -- will be torn apart. 

     The politics of division which the Republicans have parlayed
into the Presidency will turn on
even them.  George Bush has forgotten the warning of our greatest
Republican President, Abraham
Lincoln:  A house divided cannot stand.  Lincoln gave his life for
the American community.  The
Republicans have squandered his legacy.  

     I want to be a President who will unite this country.  This
morning, here at Georgetown, the
Robert Kennedy Human Rights Awards ceremony was held.  Twenty-five
years ago, when I was
President of my class here, Robert Kennedy accepted our invitation
to come to Georgetown to give a
speech.  In that same year, he gave a very different description of
what American politics should be all
about.  And I would like to read that to you today, and ask you how
long it's been since you heard an
American President say and believe these things:

          Each time a man stands up for an ideal or acts to improve
the lot of others or
     strikes out against injustice, he sends forth a tiny ripple of
hope, and crossing each other
     from a million different centers of energy and daring, those
ripples build a current that
     can sweep down the mightiest walls of oppression and
resistance.

     That is the spirit I seek to bring to the Presidency.  The
spirit of renewal of America.  I believe
with all my heart that the very future of our country is on the
line.  That is why these are not just
economic proposals.  They are the way to save the very soul of our
nation.  

     This is not just a campaign.  This is a crusade to restore the
forgotten middle class, give
economic power back to ordinary people, and recapture the American
Dream.  It is a crusade not just
for economic renewal, but for social and spiritual renewal as well. 
It is a crusade to build a new
economic order of empowerment and opportunity that will preserve
our social order and make it possible
for our country once again to make the American Dream live at home
and to be strong enough to
triumph abroad.

A Call to Economic Arms:  The New American Mandate



     America is greatness.  It is the pursuit of excellence and
the fulfillment of human capacity.  America is not the casual
acceptance of economic decline and social disintegration.  Yet,
that is what some are prepared to endure.  We are better than
what we are being asked to be by our leaders.  We are a nation of
goals, not a nation of limits.  We must have leadership that is
committed to world pre-eminence in the strength of our economy,
in the cohesion of our society, and in the quality of our
environment.  To accept anything less is to do violence to the
two centuries of our history.

     America is not just another country.  It is not just another
place.  It is the embrace of fundamental human values that define
what man can become.  America is "We The People" as respectful
keepers of the sacred trust that was forged by the blood and
hardships of those who came before us.  America has been be-
queathed to us.  It is a living heritage meant for us to preserve
and then bequeath to other Americans, yet unborn and yet proven
to be worthy.

     Today, that heritage is under attack.

     Its restoration is the great challenge of our generation.

     This is the mandate to which we must now attend.

     America faces great economic peril as our standard of living
is threatened by Europe 1992 and the Pacific Rim.  Once the
world's greatest economic power, we are selling off our national
patrimony as we sink ever deeper into national debt.  The
Reagan-Bush years have seen us become the world's greatest debtor
nation.  America is also witnessing the weakening of its social
fabric as more and more families dissolve under the onslaught of
a culture that glorifies the immediate and the shallow.  As our
historic values are disregarded by today's society-in-a-hurry,
the civility of America has been lessened.  Finally, America is
adrift as our leaders flinch from the difficult decisions that
will safeguard us from the energy and environmental threats that
confront us.  This nation's will is not being called upon on the
home front because of a fear that our people are not ready for an
honest and forceful response to these threats.  I strongly
disagree.

     The purposeful avoidance of difficult issues caused serious
erosion to our society in the eighties.  The eighties, fortunate-
ly, are over.  The icon of indulgence that we worshipped during
that decade has proven to be a false god.  However, it has left
behind a legacy of comfort and ease and the pursuit of self.

     That legacy is not what America is all about.  That legacy
contravenes the values of our ancestors.  These forebears created
a nation with an enduring work ethic, a sense of personal
discipline, and an acute appreciation of the common good.  They
had a sense of purpose that gave meaning to their lives and
strengthened their nation.  They defined patriotism as what they
did, not what they avoided doing.

     They left that sense of purpose and that patriotism to our
keeping.  We have set it aside.

     America is asking us to return to that purpose.  The time
has come for a New American Mandate, based on the precious values
of the past but focused on a vision of the future.  The New
American Mandate is a positive response to America under siege. 
Saddam Hussein is an acknowledged threat, but he is not the only
one.  Just as we deploy our men and women in the Persian Gulf, we
must deploy every American to stop our economic bleeding, to
restore our social fabric, and to meet head on the environmental
and energy threats to our well being.

     We must all be soldiers - everyone of us.  Our men and women
in the armed forces demonstrate their love of country by facing
possible death in the sands of the Arabian peninsula.  We must be
prepared to love our country as well in our every day deeds and
our every day commitments.

     America in 1991 needs our total devotion.  This paper is
meant to provide the battle plan to deploy that devotion in a way
that will strengthen the nation we love.

     The mission of the Democratic Party in 1992 would normally
be to put one of its own in the White House.  But these are not
normal times.

     What our country needs is not just a President - but a
President with the necessary mandate.  In many respects the
mandate to correctly change our course is more critical than
which party will oversee that change from the White House.

     One thing is clear.  Democrats must avoid, at all costs,
emulating the "Pledge of Allegiance/Willie Horton/Read My Lips"
campaign of George Bush.  That campaign was designed to win in
November, not govern in January.  There was no attempt to seek a
mandate except, of course, the one on taxes which everyone knew
was a cynical ruse.  The rest was all hot button politics.  It
was philosophy by polling data.

     So George Bush rules, and the nation is without a sense of
direction.  His media consultants patted themselves on the back,
pleased with a victory that would enhance their professional
reputations.  Having had no interest in creating a prevailing
wind, the White House now acts as a spinning weathervane.  The
Persian Gulf is addressed but all else remains set aside.  The
country looks for some sign of the "vision thing," but to no
avail.

     We Democrats, of course, could do the same thing.

     Winning would be thrilling as all victories are.  But on
January 20th the issues would be no less real.  Perhaps our
Democrat could be fortunate like Ronald Reagan and escape before
the consequences of his policies were fully realized.  But if
that is our offering, why would the American people substitute
one army of "feel-good" salesmen for another?

     Let us use 1992 to articulate the cold challenges and the
real threats to America that came before Saddam Hussein and will
remain after Saddam Hussein.  Let us seek to rally our nation to
forcefully address these issues.  Let us create a mandate, a
mandate that will allow purposeful and effective governance.

     Without such a mandate, the White House will be a prison. 
And the President will be captive to economic and social forces
he cannot control.  With a mandate, the fortunes of America will
truly brighten because the people will be deployed with purpose.

     This is the New American Mandate we must create.

     It requires the re-emergence of America as the world's
pre-eminent economic power.  It calls upon America to lead the
fight for world environmental equilibrium.  It demands that, once
and for all, we achieve energy sufficiency.  It seeks the
repairing of the American social fabric so that we are
spiritually one community.  It positions America as the critical
partner in achieving world peace but based upon the principles of
true burden sharing.

     If we Democrats cause that to happen, we will have truly
served our country, no matter who wins the election.

     The White House and a mandate.  Both or neither.  Let's get
on with it.

     This paper will address six of the issues around which the
strength of our nation revolves.  They are:

     Economic Survival

     Education

     Environment

     Energy

     Foreign Policy

     Our Cultural Fabric

     My views reflect my ten years on Capitol Hill, my
observations these past six years in the private sector, and my
earlier experiences living outside the United States.


I.  Economic Survival:  The Creation of National Wealth

     There is no reason why the United States should not be the
pre-eminent economic power on earth.  No reason whatsoever.  We
have the land, the resources and the people.  What we lack is the
leadership.  Our political leadership has chosen to ignore
difficult economic realities.  It has, instead, decided to
finance short-term avoidance by placing the nation under crushing
and unsustainable debt.  As a result, America is facing great
economic peril.  We are daily witnessing this ever-mounting
national debt, the inexorable sale of America to foreign
interests, and the steady deterioration of our capacity to
compete in the global marketplace.

     Yet, the alarm remains unsounded.  Washington is recession
proof.  The rest of the country, however, is not.  Washington
talk about "it's morning in America" rings hollow in communities
devastated by failing industries.  To them it's high noon. 
Bravado talk about "we can out-compete, out-produce and out-sell"
any country in the world without change in our national economic
policies is a self-serving delusion.

     Washington politicians should experience service on
corporate boards of companies that are trying to compete
internationally.  They should have their financial survival
riding on a startup business struggling under the burden of the
high costs of American capital.  They should have close relatives
seeking to manage companies under the quarterly gaze of Wall
Street vultures and getting battered by foreign companies whose
investors think in terms of years.  They should watch a son or
daughter sell off technological genius to the Japanese or Germans
or Swiss because no American company is interested.

     This is what is happening outside the Beltway.

     America's manufacturing base is under attack and Washington
treats it as just another issue.

     It is not just another issue.  It is the issue.  This
problem is our collective kryptonite.  An ever less competitive
manufacturing base inevitably means cataclysmic erosion of our
standard of living.  If we are reduced to just flipping
hamburgers and exploiting our raw materials, we will have an
economy, but it will be a diminished economy of decline and
defeat.  The American people would never stand for such a
prospect.  As the recent MIT report on competitiveness put it,
"In order to live well, a country must produce well."  This is
the slogan which should sit on the President's desk.

     It would perhaps be useful to put numbers on this concern. 
There are three major indices that tell the tale - the number of
persons employed in manufacturing, our balance of trade and the
federal budget deficit.

     Manufacturing employment:  The United States today has only
17% of its total workforce in manufacturing, down from 26% in
1970.  If defense industries are removed, we have only 15%.  The
Germans have 33% of their companies in manufacturing and the
Japanese have 28%.

     During the 1970's, the United States paid its production
workers the highest wages in the world and still maintained a
positive balance of trade.  Today, nine other nations pay higher
wages, yet our trade balance is chronically negative.

     Over the past five years, our average trade balance has been
$133 billion negative while the Germans have averaged $61 billion
positive.  Yet, the Germany average production wage and benefits
is $18.02 per hour compared with $13.92 in the United States.

     Overall productivity in this country grew at over 3% per
year from 1960 to 1973 but has risen by only 1% per year since
then.

     The average weekly earnings of the private nonagricultural
workforce grew (in 1984 dollars) from $262 in 1949 to $336 in
1959 to $387 in 1969.  Since then, it has declined to $376 in 179
and $335 in 1989.

     Balance of Trade:  Hard as it may be to believe, the United
States used to be a net exporter.  In 1960 we had a net balance
of trade surplus of $2.8 billion.  In 1970 it was a surplus of
$2.3 billion.  In 1980 it stood at a surplus of $1.1 billion. 
The 1980's have seen deficits steadily grow.  In 1990 our trade
deficit totalled over $95 billion.

     This deficit accumulation totals some $910 billion since
1980.  What does this mean?  It means that $910 billion of our
wealth has been transferred to someone else - either by resources
leaving this country or by foreigners buying up America.  At the
current rate we will either be in total hock to the outside world
or the outside world will own us.

     In contrast, the same timeframe saw Japan net a balance of
trade surplus of $57 billion in 1989.  (And this despite the fact
that it is far more dependent on imported oil than we are.) 
Germany enjoyed a surplus in 1989 of $55 billion.  These two
countries lost World War II but they are the clear victors in the
global economic wars of the present day.

     Again, this massive bleeding of America's economic base
should galvanize a fierce collective response with Washington in
the lead.  Check your local newspapers to see when it was last
mentioned and on which page it was printed.  This is avoidance
politics at its most destructive.

     Federal budget deficit:  Someday, teachers of political
history will relate the rhetoric and reality of the Reagan-Bush
economic era.  They will talk of two Republican conservatives who
successfully bashed Democrats as wild spenders.  They will speak
of these two leaders adamantly calling for a Constitutional
Amendment to force a balanced federal budget.  They will recall
the constant rhetoric of the need for the federal government to
match expenditures with incomes "like every American household." 
The students will readily understand the sheer power of this
political approach.

     Then the teacher will provide numbers.

     All forty presidents before Reagan ran up a combined
national debt of $994.3 billion.  Reagan-Bush alone added another
$2,623.5 billion.

     The much criticized Jimmy Carter ran an average budget
deficit of $57 billion.  George Bush has averaged $245 billion.

     George Bush in the FY 1990 budget alone ran a deficit
greater than the deficits of Democratic Presidents Carter,
Johnson, Kennedy and Truman combined.

     The students will not believe the teacher.  How could this
be, they will ask?  How could Reagan and Bush have gotten away
with balanced-budget rhetoric at a time of massive budget deficit
realities?  How could they lull the American people into
accepting such staggering debt without widespread revolt?

     More pointedly, they will ask, why did people allow this
enormous accumulation of debt which now burdens their generation?
This, of course, raises the pointed question of generational
morality.

     In FY 1991 the interest on the federal debt is $197 billion. 
By the year 2000, it is expected to reach 25% of the entire
federal budget.  This reality is morally reprehensible.  It is
the record of the Reagan-Bush years.

     The Democratic response must, above all, seek to reestablish
our manufacturing capability at, or above, that of the Japanese. 
The Republicans, of course, have carefully avoided the
articulation of any goals whatsoever.

     Some of them argue that the decline in our manufacturing
base is acceptable because it will be replaced by a service-based
economy.  This is the avoidance politicians' drug of choice. 
There is no such thing as being a major financial center in the
world without a vibrant competitive manufacturing sector.  Again,
numbers tell the story.  The largest American bank is Citicorp. 
In 1970 it ranked 2nd worldwide.  Chase Manhattan Bank was ranked
3rd.  In 1980 they ranked 5th and 11th, respectively.  Today,
they rank 24th and 54th.  Sixteen Japanese banks rank ahead of
our biggest.  In major financial transactions we are, in effect,
dropping from the radar screen.  It is no accident that the
world's six largest banks are now Japanese.  The Germans and
French also have major banking entities and they are resolute in
emphasizing manufacturing.  A nation without a manufacturing base
is a nation heading toward third world status.  So much for
morning in America.

     This economic silent spring is a disgrace.  Yet, no word of
alarm escapes from George Bush.  "Read my lips, add more debt."

     Our forefathers labored mightily to establish America as the
pre-eminent economic power on earth.  We have allowed the fruits
of their labors to be sold off to foreign buyers, one national
treasure after another.  We accept enormous trade deficits month
after month, year after year, with hardly a murmur.  We treat the
staggering federal deficits as inevitable results of political
gridlock.  It's time we faced up to our peril.

     This is where democracies rely upon the courage of their
elected leaders.  The normal political instinct is to always
engage in happy talk.  It is courage which allows a politician to
take a people beyond that.  It takes toughness to lead a people
toward their preservation no matter how disquieting the journey
may be.  For avoidance of unpleasant reality is simply part of
human nature.

     I learned that lesson once more in the aftermath of my
cancer diagnosis in 1983.  I found myself wishing for soothing
reassurance, but what I needed was tough love.  Not feeling ill,
I wanted to just go home and live a normal life and not deal with
the disease until I absolutely had to.  For a while that's what I
did.  And it was possible to push away the awareness of the
realities inside of me.

     By 1985, however, I was put on mild oral chemotherapy.  This
was done in hopes of avoiding the more toxic intravenous drugs. 
And I knew that after that would come radiation.  And after that,
perhaps, would come the still experimental bone marrow
transplant.  I even put myself on a macrobiotic diet in search of
an effortless deliverance.  My doctor was not impressed.

     When the time came for my late fall checkup my doctor was
shocked at my deteriorated condition and upset with me for not
seeking him out earlier than my scheduled appointment.  The
disease was voluminous in my body and was about to consume me.

     The next ten months contained no happy talk.  Monthly
sessions of intravenous chemotherapy were followed by target
radiation.  In late August, I was undergoing the bone marrow
transplant with its massive chemotherapy and whole body
radiation.  For the next six weeks I was confined to a sterile
hospital room, attempting to recover from these assaults to my
body.  These were weeks of fear and discomfort, of course, but
they were also weeks of slowly realizing that I was now able to
look at the monster full face.  In early October I was released
from that room.  I was back to work by mid-November, thin as a
rail, bald as a billiard ball and wondrous of my survival.

     I have often reflected back upon those ten months.  I know
that my hard-nosed, no-margin-for-error doctors saved my life. 
But I also know that I resented their tough approach during that
period.

     My story is my own but there are millions of Americans who
have had to learn the same lesson in countless other personal
crises.  Avoidance of hard truths makes the inevitable dealing
with them all the more difficult.  And what is true for
individuals is also true for nations.

     In 1991 there is a need for us to acknowledge that we must
get our financial house in order.  The New American Mandate is,
above all, an economic imperative.  It is committing ourselves to
the actions necessary to achieve full economic recovery and
unassailable competitive strength.  This involves what we do
every day in the workplace and every day in the marketplace.  It
is thinking about these daily events as expressions of economic
patriotism - as necessary prerequisites for the preservation of
our standard of living.

     Through the New American Mandate we will demand that our
leaders articulate the policies for this economic regeneration. 
Not just the comfortable policies, but the difficult ones as
well.  Not at some distant time when it will be politically
easier, but now, while we still have the capacity to control our
destiny.

     We need a national economic policy.  What we have today is a
naive faith that our companies can compete without any public
sector help as they struggle against foreign companies linked to
governments with resolute industrial policies.  Our companies are
going forth to do one-on-one battle and are being mugged.  Their
competitors are aided by governments that aggressively seek out
the advantages of uneven playing fields whenever possible.

     The Reagan-Bush response to all this has been benign neglect
on a global basis.  And the muggings continued unabated.  We
Democrats must do better.  We must level the playing field.

     There are many components to a national economic policy. 
Let me list a few.

Democratic and Republican Shibboleths

     Both political parties are going to have to abandon the
rusty core elements of their economic philosophies and head off
in new directions.  These archaic old saws are much embraced by
party chieftains.  The affection for them expressed by party
ideologues is matched only by our trading competitors' fervent
hope that they will never disappear.  These nations benefit by
our politics of self-delusion. 

Democrats

     Democrats have always believed that their essential mission
is social and economic justice.  And so it is.  Look for such
advancements in the twentieth century and in almost every
instance a Democrat's hand has been at work.  It is a noble
tradition.

     That tradition must never be abandoned.

     Underlying that mission, however, has been a rarely
acknowledged but enduring notion.  Wealth would be created by
others and after its creation we Democrats would intervene to
preserve fairness by the equitable redistribution of that wealth. 
During most of this century that may have been a logical battle
plan.  Not so any more.

     There is today one glaring truth.  You cannot redistribute
wealth that is never created.  A party devoted to the purpose of
carving up the economic pie should be alarmed by the reality that
the pie is shrinking.  Witness the devastation being visited upon
critical social programs by the shortfall in tax revenues in most
states in the country.

     Democrats are going to have to go back to the original act -
the creation of national wealth.  They are going to have to sit
down with the business community and jointly establish policies
of wealth creation.  It means giving up comfortable political
nuclear weapons - such as the marvelous boost gained from
routinely attacking corporate America and big business.  Some
recent Democratic rhetoric presents itself as traditional
populism, an "us-them" view of the world where the "them" is
anyone in the manufacturing, service or banking industries.  Wake
up, Democrats.  Without viable manufacturing, service and banking
sectors, there is no country.  A marriage - note the word is
marriage, not liaison - with corporate America is essential. 
Corporate America must survive, indeed thrive, if our Democratic
social agenda is to have any hope of implementation.

     This does not mean that we put aside our concern about 
social and economic justice.  That standard must remain in the
forefront of our consciousness.  But it must coexist with a
resolute determination that America must create wealth in order
to provide a decent standard of living for our people.

     To effectively deal with the problems of homelessness, of
AIDS, of affordable housing, of catastrophic health care for
everyone, of college scholarships, of all the human needs we care
about there must be revenue flow from which to secure the
necessary funds.  The more we want to solve the great human
injustices in our society, the more we are going to need a full
throttle economic engine.  One cannot exist without the other.

     Pro-business, some would call it.  And so it is. 
Aggressively so.  But commonwealth is what it is as well.  There
is a real political opening here for our party.  Many in the
business community are quite alarmed by the economic decline of
America and want to fight back.  They see an administration that
has always devoted its energies elsewhere and offers no real hope
that its disinterest will ever end.  These business leaders,
however, view the Democrats with deep skepticism.  They do truly
see us as "tax and spend" advocates who are instinctively hostile
to business interests.  Our task is to convince them that we
really understand one simple reality.  America's standard of
living is totally dependent upon their capacity to compete and be
profitable.  It's about time we said so and acted accordingly.

     To me this is not an abstraction.  My childhood was spent
experiencing the economic decline of my home city, Lowell,
Massachusetts.  My father (a Republican) owned a dry cleaners and
the entire family worked in the business.  My father worked from
6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., six days a week, 51 weeks a year. 
Sundays were spent doing the books and repairing the machinery. 
By any fair standard, this staggering workload should have
resulted in just rewards for him.  It didn't.  No matter how hard
he worked, no matter how conscientious he was, the forces of
Lowell's economic decline were too much to overcome.

     The remembrance of those days has left me with an inability
to view economic dislocation casually.  Perhaps I have too good a
memory.  But when I see our nation's economic indices, I have a
foreboding sense of not wanting these trends to run their course. 
I want to determine my own fate.  I believe the business world is
full of people who share this deep concern.  We Democrats must
reach out to them.

Republicans

     Whereas the Democrats must learn to embrace the world of
industrialists, entrepreneurs and venture capitalists,
Republicans are going to have to alter their views as well.

     At the Republican core is the almost religious belief that
an unfettered free market is the best of all worlds.

     Industrial policy is seen as equivalent to child
pornography.  It is seen as the domain of such reprobates as
Castro, the Sandinistas and the now discredited Communist
planners.

     This view is unschooled.  Industrial policies presuppose a
market system.  They show how to improve the competitiveness of
private firms through public policies.  Since Communist central
planning systems have neither markets nor private companies, it
is by definition a contradiction in terms to refer to them as
having industrial policies.

     Republicans are going to have to refine their perspectives
to realize that to embrace any component of an industrial policy
is not to immediately be guilty of Soviet-style central planning
activities.

     Industrial policy is what Japan has.  It is what Germany
has.  It is what we must have as well.

     When I was involved with the Chrysler bill some eleven years
ago, the attitude of the purist laissez faire proponents was,
basically, "let it die."  To argue the case for sustaining a
company with a viable future product line was difficult because
some felt it was government intervention.  And it was.  But if
the company had gone under would America have been better off? 
Of course not.  The government even made money on the deal when
it was all over.  But I never heard anyone say that they would
have voted differently.  An America with just two major auto
manufacturers is not an industrial policy.  Saving Chrysler was
industrial policy.  It worked and we should not be so quick to
forget that fact.

     Republicans are well trained to look at potential military
adversaries and demand weapon equivalence in defense of the
nation.  If these adversaries have a particular military
capability, then by definition, we must put aside all other
considerations to make our military capability even bigger and
better.

     Today our economic enemies are our political friends.  The
war they wage is in the marketplace, not on the battlefield. 
America can be done away with by economic decay just as assuredly
as by foreign invasion.  The implosion of the Warsaw Pact was
economic, political and social.  It collapsed from its own
internal weaknesses, not by the force of outside military attack. 
An ever diminishing standard of living in the United States will
cause us to battle each other over diminishing resources.  We
will cease to be a major factor in world affairs as we focus only
upon our downward spiral.

     For the Republicans as well there should be one glaring
truth.  American companies need the United States government as a
full partner if they are to have any hope of competing
internationally.  That means an industrial policy.  Take a deep
breath, my Republican friends.  It's a brave new world out there. 
Adam Smith was a marvelous man but he wouldn't know a
superconductor or memory chip if he tripped over one.

     Take another deep breath.  The threat to America today is
not only a diminished Soviet Union.  It is not just Saddam
Hussein.  It is the threat of a different dimension.  It is
Japanese, German, Taiwanese, Swiss, French, South Korean, etc. 
Friends all.  But just as capable of reducing us to impotence. 
They have already begun.  The adrenalin that Republicans would
call up at will to confront Soviets or Cubans or Sandinistas or
East Germans or North Koreans or the Iraqi Republican Guard must
be called up to confront our friends.

     This is war by another playwright.  But it's still war.

     It doesn't take a genius to understand the post-Gulf War
era.  The Japanese and Germans will have emerged as even more
formidable economic competitors.  They chose to bypass the
conflict while we made it our foremost national purpose.  It is
no accident that CNN and network coverage of the war was viewed
by Americans on Japanese TV sets and was interspersed with ads
from Japanese manufactured products.

     Republicans must acknowledge this and begin to mobilize
accordingly.  This means opening up to aggressive and resolute
policies which will put the government in the foxhole with our
beleaguered American companies.  Republicans who focus on
"defense strength" must be made to understand that such
capabilities come from government funds.  Government funds come
from taxes.  And taxes come from a vibrant economy.  Kill the
economy and you have no "defense strength."

     If the New American Mandate requires Democrats to embrace
the creation of wealth, it also requires Republicans to see honor
in asking the question "what works" and to see dishonor in
slavish adherence to past economic dogma.

     For Democrats the political opportunity lies in the
likelihood that George Bush will not act any differently about
this than Ronald Reagan did.  There are three reasons for this.

     First, the politics are an impediment.  Avoidance politics
have always been, and will always be, powerfully seductive. 
"Read my lips, no new taxes" was just the latest in a long line
of homage to false gods.  The Reagan-Bush line has been to gloss
over the dangers ("morning in America") and simply ignore
fundamental economic trends.  Their concern is the immediate
judgment of their electoral contemporaries not the judgment of
historians - even if that history is rapidly coming upon us.  It
is my contention that the accumulation of hard data as to our
economic dilemma has provided a base for electoral realism in
1992.  That base can only expand.  The 1992 Democratic campaign
must take it on faith that Americans are prepared to wage this
economic battle ferociously.  The Republicans will presume the
opposite and will continue their avoidance politics.

     Second, there is no sense of urgency.  Most of the key
economic decision makers in the administration come from
circumstances of affluence.  For them there will be financial
insulation no matter what happens.  Their economic safety nets
are made of steel cables.  There is no foreboding.  There is no
perception that the economic ground beneath them can tremble.  It
is just too removed from their own personal histories and
circumstances.  This is not meant to suggest venality.  It is
meant to suggest that perception of a particular threat is more
acute in those who have faced it before.

     Third, the trade deficit, the budget deficits and
manufacturing employment numbers listed above are all
Reagan-Bush.  They occurred during their watch.  They are the
party of record.

     To reverse course would be to acknowledge that their unaided
free market policies have been dysfunctional as we confront trade
competitors who have their public and private sectors in resolute
harmony.  To reverse course is to admit error.  It will never
happen.  At best they will work around the margins.  A full blown
frontal assault on the economic threat would require a
self-analysis of the past eleven years that will inevitably sully
the Reagan-Bush record.  George Bush cannot, and will not, do
this.  His course was set more than a decade ago when he
retreated from his declaration that Reagan's policies were
"voodoo economics."  Once he capitulated to that Republican
realpolitik, his options were narrowed forever.

     We Democrats must insure that George Bush's dilemma is not
America's dilemma.

Recognize the Peril

     This is step one.  This is where America and George Bush
must part company.  No one ever solved a problem he refused to
acknowledge.

     Yes, we are losing ground, particularly in high technology,
basic manufacturing, and financial services.

     Yes, it is the national crisis of the highest priority.

     Yes, it threatens to seriously reduce the American standard
of living.

     Yes, it will destroy the economic foundation of our military
national security.

     Yes, it will severely compromise our capability to play a
peacekeeping role in world affairs.

     Yes, we now believe that government must be an active
partner in this great challenge.

     Yes, America should be the pre-eminent manufacturing nation
on earth again.

     Yes, Americans are the equal of any workforce in the world.

     Good.  Now let's get on with it.

Be Prepared to Make Strategic Investments

     The notion of investing in the technologies necessary to
create the Star Wars program was hotly debated.  But it became
national policy and billions were allocated to that purpose.

     Why?  National security.

     What about investments in technologies that could impact our
economic national security?  Horrors.  That's central planning.

     In the long run would America be better off with hundreds of
billions invested in an improbable Star Wars system arrayed only 
against an imploding Soviet Union or by developing an
insurmountable lead in ceramic engines, supercomputers and memory
chips?  Indeed, without a thriving manufacturing capability in
these industries the economic base to fund military research can
not exist.  Many anti-industrial policy Republicans would say
that the non-functionality of Star Wars against the Soviet Union
is an unfortunate but necessary price of eternal vigilance
against a foreign military threat.  These people would also argue
against major governmental investments in strategic technologies
because, unlike the Japanese, "we can't pick winners and losers." 
What about the economic foreign threat?

     Again, it's a matter of mindset.

     Washington has been focused on the Soviet challenge for the
entire adult years of most of its leaders.  It rebels at the
notion that in the 1990's there are real dangers that do not
emanate from missiles or tanks or fighter aircraft.

     It must rethink threat.  Threat can be venal such as a
Saddam Hussein.  But threat can come from people who are friendly
and have no evil intent.
     The threat to America is economic as well.  We must think of
government and industry as partners with the same level of
enthusiasm, indeed patriotism, that the military-industrial
complex generates for its joint mission.  Strategic investments
in emerging technologies is part of an industrial policy which
will result in some losers, yes, but will also result in some
critical winners as well.  These winners will be a major part of
our economic future.  Particularly now that American venture
capital has shrunk dramatically, government has a contributing
role to play in insuring that our push for technological
competitiveness has a fair chance at success.

Promotion of Science and Research

     This is one area where the rhetoric is in place but not the
reality.  The National Science Foundation, the National
Institutes of Health, NASA, the Departments of Energy and
Agriculture among others, are the mothers' milk of cutting edge
research investigations.  We should not be satisfied with
marginal increases in these budgets.  Again, its a matter of
mindset.  The Manhattan Project.  The Apollo program.  The war in
the Persian Gulf.  It's just a matter of recognizing the threat
and responding to it.  There will be no manufacturing sector
without a powerful basic and applied research capability.  Put
these agencies at the top of our funding priorities.

     In addition to the traditional areas of basic and applied
research, we must devote more attention to applied engineering
and manufacturing engineering.

     The economic war that we are losing is centered on process
technologies.  The taking of new ideas, indeed, even old ideas,
and converting them to manufactured goods is the great trade
battle ground.  The winners here are those who can take high and
low tech products and simply manufacture them better.  It is the
process of manufacturing that should also be the recipient of
research monies since it is only the production of a technology
which creates wealth.  The initial discovery and development of a 
product are the stuff of Nobel Prizes and prideful articles in
trade journals.  But that is not enough.

     The prior definition of success embraced those who could
conceive new product ideas.  Today the definition of success
embraces those who can take those ideas, wherever they may
originate, and turn them into products quickly, efficiently, and
with great quality control.  The Japanese takeover of the
American-originated VCR market is an obvious example.  These are
the cash cows.  These are the providers of employment for a
nation's people.  They are equally worthy of intellectual inquiry
and investigation.

     The need here is to exalt science in all its dimensions. 
There must be a White House effort to create an environment
wherein young Americans choose science (and engineering) as a
career.  The society as a whole needs to acknowledge that we will
survive as a viable economy only by the fruits of the minds of
young American scientists.  To have our best and brightest
heading to law schools and Wall Street is a gross misallocation
of resources.  The best and the brightest should be in the
laboratories and in the production facilities.  The best and the
brightest should be deployed to reinvigorate our manufacturing
sector.  This will require a sea change away from the values of
the 1980's that drove our young away from occupations of
production and into the occupations of the paper chase.

     A society which pays its 29 year old science researchers
$25,000 a year and its 29 year old lawyers $100,000 a year and
its 29 year old investment bankers $200,000 a year and its 29
year old left fielders $2 million a year is sending all the wrong
messages.  It is a formula for unrelenting decline.  The young
American scientist must be recognized as the fuel of any viable
economic engine.

Change Anti-Trust Laws

     Current anti-trust laws prevent American companies from
joint venturing in almost any area including such critical ones
as research and development.  The rationale for this policy is
rooted in America of years past, long before our companies faced
foreign corporate behemoths.  We need to pool our resources to be
equal with our competition.  We have to allow our companies to
muscle up.  Joint venturing is the sine qua non of that
capability.  It must become an everyday occurrence in order to
equip these companies to compete in the global marketplace.

     American companies should be released from anti-trust
constraints in areas which impact on their capabilities in
international trade.

     This is one area where our Japanese and German competitors
view us with great mirth.  To them the concept of group
strategies is an obvious way of maximizing your strengths. 
Seeing America hobbled by her own hand must seem to be a heaven-
sent advantage.

     Current American law pays homage to a period when all the
producers were American and thus cooperation between them was
clearly dangerous to the consuming public.  Today most of the
producers are foreign and they threaten to eradicate American
producers.  There must be a serious rethinking.  The fact that
our anti-trust laws were not changed years ago speaks to the
absolute neglect of the cutting edge issues of competitiveness
while we engage endlessly in the rhetoric of promoting
competitiveness.  Democrats are particularly vulnerable to this
criticism.  We must give our companies a more level playing field
through policy changes that don't require massive federal
expenditures.

Increase our savings rate

     Congress should pass laws which encourage savings over
consumption.  This will create a capital pool which will begin to
match the resource base that countries with high savings rates
enjoy.  The lack of a capital pool is the economic equivalent of
unilateral disarmament.

     The numbers here are staggering.  Compare the United States,
Japan and Germany in years 1980, 1984 and 1988.  Our national
savings as a percentage of GNP went from 18.8 to 17.0 to 15.1.

     Germany had rates of 21.7 to 21.7 to 24.5.

     Japan, of course, was in a class by itself.  It had rates of
31.1 to 30.7 to 33.3.

     We need a dramatic improvement in our rate of savings in
order to provide the much needed capital base for investment.

     A much greater abundance of capital will serve two purposes. 
 First, it will reduce the cost of capital to U.S. companies.
Currently the cost of capital in America far exceeds that of
Japan and Germany.  It renders corporate decision makers unable
to make investments whose payout is long term.  This financial
barrier is lethal to the kinds of corporate strategies that are
necessary in order to compete.

     Second, it will reduce our current hazardous dependence on
outside sources of capital.  These are sources which can quickly
evaporate when these nations decide they have other more pressing
uses for these funds: i.e. West Germany's current interest in
investing in the restoration of former East Germany.  Being
dependent on foreign capital is not unlike being dependent on
foreign oil.  You don't control your own destiny.  Various
I.R.A.s for retirement, college expenses, home ownership are
examples of pro-savings incentives. Other ideas should be
aggressively explored.

     Finally, the savings ethic must be fully ingrained in the
American culture forever, not just to get us through this
difficult period.  That means our children must be part of it. 
Schools should work with banks to give each child a savings
account or some equivalent.  No matter how small, such accounts
establish a thought process.  Efforts should be made to allow the
pooling of funds into Childrens Mutual Funds, wherein school
groups could invest minor amounts of money at reduced service
fees.  This would have the additional benefit of directly
involving children in learning about and caring about the
American economic system.  These would be latter day Economic
Liberty Bonds.  Young people would be taking a personal step in
helping to provide the capital necessary in America's battle for
economic survival.

     The secondary value of such participation by the young is
the early awareness of how dependent America is upon the actions
of individuals.  Hopefully, this sense of personal relevance will
be reinforced by other actions and lead to a more contributory
attitude towards citizenship.  Our people must perceive America's
economic vulnerability and see their own essential role in
safeguarding their nation.

Investment Over Consumption

     There are a lot of indices that show the inevitable decline
of American economic fortunes compared to those of the Japanese
and Germans.  Inevitable, that is, if these numbers are not
changed.

     Probably the most significant are the numbers which reflect
the differences in mindset relative to investment and
consumption.

     Consumption is today.

     Investment is tomorrow.

     It is seed corn consumed versus seed corn planted.  Nothing
is more basic.

     Yet relative to our competitors, we are devoted to
consumption, and they are devoted to investment.

     Again raw numbers.  The investment rates of the United
States, Japan and Germany.  Public and private.  Years 1970, 1980
and 1988.

     United States: public  15.1 and 15.6 and 15.5.
                    private  2.5 and  1.8 and  1.6.

     Germany:       public  20.9 and 19.1 and 17.5.
                    private  4.6 and  3.6 and  2.4.

     Japan:         public  31.0 and 25.5 and 25.3.
                    private  4.5 and  6.1 and  5.2.

     The reasons for this are historical.  Japan and Germany were
ravaged during World War II.  Their leadership and their
populations had known the horrors of economic disequilibrium -
from runaway inflation to personal deprivation.  Out of this
adversity came the intense Post-War determination to create
patterns of economic behavior that value future stability and
security over present day consumption.  We saw the Post-War
period as the time to reap the fruits of our victory.  Present
day consumption was seen as an earned reward eclipsing any
widespread sense of providing for the future.  The 1980's were
the epitome of that mindset.  It was assumed the future would
always be economically secure.  That assumption was wrong.  The
result of these national patterns if allowed to persist will be a
much lesser America.  Fewer good jobs.  More foreign ownership. 
More social dislocation.  Less world influence.  More crushing
debt, both personal and national.  The savers will dominate the
spenders.  The investors will eclipse the consumers.  The lean
and hungry will always prevail over the comfortable and
complacent.

     The problem here is not that all of this is not understood. 
The problem is that being understood by economists is one thing. 
Being understood by politicians is quite another.  And
transforming understanding into action is more difficult still.

     The economists will say that investment and consumption are
like a seesaw.  In order for investment to go up, consumption
must come down.  Herein lies the political dilemma.  But herein
also lies the opportunity for political leadership.

     Through the New American Mandate, our people will affirm
their commitment to a policy that defines the common good as the
promotion of investment over consumption.  We need to create in
ourselves the kind of steely will to survive economically that
our Japanese and German counterparts still have.  We must fashion
a political environment wherein a drumbeat for necessary economic
policies allows our elected officials to do what is right without
fear of immediate ouster.  Voting for needed economic reform must
be demanded by the electorate.  Continued avoidance of such
reform must be clearly identified as unacceptable pandering by
politicians who are putting their own re-election concerns above
the national interest.

     This involves choices, few of which will be easy.  Yet
relative to the economic decisions being faced by countries like
Poland and the Soviet Union they are far less onerous.  Far less. 
It means looking at the entitlement programs, heretofore a
political never-never land in American politics.  Would the
Congress support a policy of reducing the yearly increase in
entitlements by one percent below the cost of living?  It's not a
great deal but it would establish a policy of economic response. 
But politically it will not pass, even for those above a certain
income level, in the absence of a clear understanding as to the
nation's need for such a measure.  It must be seen as patriotic
to rally all of us to this cause.  The principle of shared
sacrifice for the common good must be advanced.  This is the
"vision thing" that George Bush finds so hard to come to grips
with.

     The policy must be made clear to every American.  We must
make the transition from a high consumption/low investment
country to a lesser consumption/high investment country.  Japan
and Germany did so decades ago because adversity gave them no
choice.  Can America do the same without having experienced such
deprivation?  Can we act in time to lessen the impact of far more
painful decisions in the future?
     I believe we can if the political leadership is prepared to
show the way.

Reduce the capital gains tax for investments in appropriate
securities held for a long period of time
     The current capital gains tax debate would only happen in a
political environment far removed from the pressures faced by
American companies.  We don't need an across the board capital
gains reduction as President Bush fought so desperately for last
year.  Encouraging people to invest in raw land or commercial
buildings or art collections adds nothing to our competitiveness. 
They are simply less critical recipients of our capital. 
Providing capital gains advantages to people who speculate in the
stock market is equally counterproductive since it rewards
short-term corporate horizons at the expense of long-term
corporate strategies.  It also encourages our most talented to
seek their fortunes by speculative and manipulative paper
shuffling as opposed to production oriented careers.  Michael
Milken at $500 million a year is very powerful career counseling
of the worse kind.

     We need to limit capital gains incentives to long-term
investments in corporate America.  This signals that such
investments are our nation's top investment priority.  To be
effective, this signal cannot be rhetoric, but must be pure
marketplace.  Invest here and your returns will be maximized.  
Very simple.  Invest in an American company, hold that stock
rather than speculate with it, and you get a significantly lower
capital gains tax rate.  The longer the stock is held, the lower
the tax rate.

     In addition, efforts should be made to define new
enterprises.  While the focus of the capital gains tax
differential must be on corporate investments, it makes obvious
sense to give an added incentive to such new enterprises.  The
growth of the American industrial base has always come from small
and emerging businesses.  These are the entrepreneurs with the
greatest maneuverability.  But they also have the greatest
vulnerability.  Today with the shrinking of the venture capital
markets they are at even greater risk.  There should be
differentials here large enough to attract serious investment
into those new ventures which will provide sources of fresh
employment in the years ahead.  It is time for paying attention
to sunrise enterprises as well as sunset enterprises.

     It is this combination of criteria that should make the
capital gains reduction a central part of creating an America in
economic rebound.  Such a program would channel capital towards
our industrial/manufacturing sector and would stretch out the
time horizons of investors.

     The obstacle here is party politics.  Some Democrats oppose
any capital gains differential because supporting it prevents
them from using the "class warfare" argument against the
Republicans.  Taking aggressive anti-business positions is second
nature to them.  Class warfare is certainly good politics.  But
it's good politics at the expense of the nation's industrial
base.   Democrats should be concerned with what a targeted
capital gains tax would do for America and not be focused on a
myopic discourse about who benefits the most under such a system. 
It is the common good that counts.

     I learned this lesson in 1975 in Lowell.  My home city was
being crushed under double digit unemployment.  The downtown was
a visually unattractive array of buildings that had not seen any
reinvestment for decades.  Lowell was everyone's model of a
depressed mill city.

     As a new Congressman I proposed the creation of the Lowell
Financial and Development Corporation.  This entity would be
funded by the local banks contributing one-twentieth of one
percent of their assets to it.  The corporation would then
reinvest those funds in restoring the historic buildings of the
downtown.  There was the expected resistance from some of the
bankers but eventually they agreed because they, in essence,
owned this devaluating property.

     What was not expected was the feeling by a few non-business
people that the corporation was inappropriate because it would
benefit some building owners that they considered unsavory. 
These people don't deserve to receive financial rewards, they
argued, because they are responsible for letting these buildings
fall into disarray in the first place.

     I must admit that I felt some sympathy for this
righteousness but not enough to change my mind.  The corporation
was created, and it and its organizational twin, the Lowell Plan,
have been very successful.  Lowell has become a national model of
urban renaissance.

     Did the "unsavory" people benefit?  They sure did.  But so
did everyone else in a once-depressed mill city with what had
seemed a marginal future.  So what.

Provide for a Research & Development Tax Credit

     This should be self-explanatory.  We can't compete long term
if we are not putting our earnings back into research and
development.  Such reinvestment back into a company should be
viewed as the corporate investment of highest priority and taxed
accordingly.  Farmers who consume their seed corn are never heard
from again.  The same is true of companies.  We have to help
American companies strengthen their prospects for the long term.

Change the counterproductive short term U.S. corporate
perspective

     The U.S. system of corporate survival is strictly a short
term game.  All of the forces in the marketplace reward the
shortsighted and penalize the wise.  It cuts down the chief
executive officer (and his board of directors) who thinks long
term and is willing to put his money where his strategy is.  For
example, CEO #1 and CEO #2 have similar companies with equivalent
earnings.  CEO #1 takes 30% of his earnings and invests it in a
long term research project that he has faith in.  CEO #2 shares
that faith but chooses to retain that 30% as an earnings dividend
to the shareholder.  Company #1's stock, therefore, will be lower
than Company #2's because its earnings are lower.  Company #1,
therefore, is more attractive to a takeover since its stock can
be acquired at a lower price and it has a long term technology 
strategy.  Company #2 is less attractive to a takeover for
exactly the opposite reasons - higher stock price and less long
term technological promise.  Who is the better CEO?  Who is the
safer CEO?  These are questions that will yield two different
answers.  This is especially true if company #2 uses its higher
stock price to acquire company #1 and then slashes the research
and development budget in order to help pay off the resultant
debt.  This is the true American corporate nightmare.  We must
enact fundamental changes to reverse this reality.  It means
charting new waters but it must be done.

     The role of CEO must be redefined in accordance with the new
world economic realities.  Historically the CEO was charged with
maximizing the short term value of the stockholder's holdings, no
more, no less.  Any policy which veered from this approach was an
invitation to hostile shareholder lawsuits.

     The new definition must include the notion of the CEO as
keeper of the assets of the company.  Those assets are
all-inclusive - human, technological, physical and financial. 
The primary responsibility must be the advancement and growth of
those assets over the long term.  It must prevail over the policy
of short term shareholder value that comes at the expense of the
nation's long term need to have growing vibrant companies.  We
must get to the point where the pursuit of short term profits by
destroying assets, selling off assets, and ravaging research and
development budgets, will be seen as highly inappropriate.

     Unshackling a progressive CEO also demands that we redefine
the proper role for corporate directors as we attempt to be
internationally competitive.  At issue here are the same concerns
- i.e. corporate strategies and corporate time horizons.  But it
also involves the attendant issue of director exposure to
shareholder lawsuits where the shareholder's interest is
immediate cash-in value irrespective of management practices that
strengthen the company's future.  Corporate board meetings are
generally focused on month-to-month or quarter-to-quarter
reporting of data, as opposed to exhaustive examination of long
term corporate strategies.  We must implement ways for directors
to support long term horizon strategies that benefit the company
and the nation over the long haul and not have these directors
subject to instant legal liability.
     I experienced this catch-22 while serving on the board of a
publicly-held company.  The corporation had accumulated excess
cash as a result of divestitures and had to decide what to do
with this resource.  The choices were pretty straightforward. 
Keeping the cash on hand was an open invitation for a takeover
bid by someone seeking to buy the company, take the cash and just
dump the rest of the assets.  This would weaken the remaining
company dramatically and we all knew that.

     Distribution of the cash as dividends and a possible
management buyout, etc. were a second possible approach.  This
was the safest of director options since it would be well
received by the shareholders.  The problem with it was simple. 
The company would not have gained any new strength as it ventured
forth in the future.  The cash would have been expended without
impact on our competitive capability.  It would have created a
company with lesser viability over the long term.

     The final possibility was to use the cash to acquire a
complementary second company and end up with a larger
corporation.  This would mean better market share, a broader
technology base and real economies of scale.  It was a classic
example of technological synergy and corporation muscling up.  An
easy decision?  Hardly.  It was the decision most likely to put
the directors at risk because we would be choosing to bet on long
term stock appreciation rather than immediate shareholder gain.

     There was a direct correlation between director legal
liability and preserving the company.  Put another way, to
maximize our own personal legal security, we would have had to
vote to leave the company in a weakened position.

     We chose not to do so.  We made the acquisition.  The
company is now profitable and the stock is appreciating.

     That's all very nice but I vividly remember walking to my
car after the meeting wondering whether I had risked the
financial well-being of my family by deciding to make the company
as competitive as possible.  What if the gamble had failed and I
had been sued?  Would I have been able to convince my family that
their financial sacrifice was warranted?

     These dynamics are lethal to American competitiveness. 
Unless directors are convinced that long term strategies will not
invite hostile takeovers, unless directors are convinced that
supporting long term strategies will not expose them to serious
legal exposure - unless these are the new realities in the
corporate board room, nothing will change no matter how
progressive corporate management wants to be.

     There is, admittedly, a very fine line here.  The threat of
stockholder lawsuits has a real and valid function.  Corporate
directors should fear a reckoning if they do not meet their
fiduciary responsibilities.  But why should short term
shareholder value be considered more responsible by our legal
system than long term competitive viability?  Why should the
de facto damaging of the nation's industrial capability be a
safeguard against lawsuits?  Somehow the ground rules have to
change.  We must seize the opportunity to step back and rethink
existing assumptions.  This would entail changing the scope of
director responsibility to include the requirement that long term
competitive viability be a standard component of any decision
making process.  Another would be a requirement that directors
annually review research and development budgets both as to the
percentage of the total corporate budget compared to competitors
and as to the particular research agenda.  Boards should include
directors who possess relevant skills in the appropriate
technologies and not just financial and management expertise.

     Another counterproductive assumption is the one that holds
that every public corporation must release its financial data
every three months..  These quarterly reports define corporate
America today.  Their release triggers instant response by Wall
Street and other like watchers.  Nothing is as sacred as these
quarterly announcements.  Nothing is as traditional and nothing
is as expected.

     Yet that doesn't make them necessarily valuable.  Is it not
time to ponder the following?  Neither Japan nor Germany has such
a practice.  They rely upon annual reports.  They are known to
have much longer corporate time horizons than we do.  We should
explore the concept of stretching out quarterly reports to
semi-annual reports.  Or indeed even to just annual reports.  If
our very successful trading competitors do just nicely, thank
you, without quarterly reports, why are they essential here?  I
would suggest that serving the gurus and traders and speculators
and raiders of Wall Street is far less important than serving
those within our companies who are trying to survive.

     Let the debate begin.  The need is to stretch out corporate
horizons.  Quarterly reports do just the opposite.

Management-Labor Attitude Changes

     The rhetoric about management-labor cooperation is oft-heard
but needs a boost from the Presidential bully pulpit.

     Management must be encouraged to drop old attitudes about
workers being the "other side" and to engage workers in true
joint consultation and decision making.  These are the only
avenues to the kind of productivity and quality control necessary
to have competitive products.  There is a new awareness about the
need to change archaic management techniques but change comes
hard.  Management of the old school still occupies too many
executive suites, buttressed by too many old bulls in the board
rooms.

     The President should give high and consistent visibility to
companies that are inclusive in their practices and progressive
in their techniques by visiting plants where these practices are
in place.

     By publicly holding out such companies as models, it will
help create an environment wherein regressive management
techniques will be more and more isolated over time.  It will
bring about the kind of dialogue about management practices that
will accelerate progressive change.  This dialogue will provoke
the kind of critical corporate self-analysis that too often
happens only after Chapter 11 has been filed and the golden
parachutes deployed.  The need is for mid-course corrections, not
better corporate autopsies.

     Correspondingly, the unions (and non-unions) must change
more rapidly as well.  Union officials should save their
ammunition to fight for issues like wage scale, health benefits
and worker safety.  No effort should be expended trying to defend
illogical work rules that are nothing but feather bedding.  The
common goal should be highest possible productivity at the
highest possible wage rates.  Many union officials have been very
active in forging this new direction but if we are to be
competitive there needs to be near unanimous acceptance of this
perspective.  A President, especially a Democratic President,
should give overt support to progressive union leaders while
being willing to criticize those who cling to outmoded views.

     This rationale applies equally to non-union work forces. 
The New American Mandate means workers who proudly embrace their
responsibility to help their companies prosper.

     Companies saddled with management that distrusts its
workforce combined with workforce leadership which feels no
responsibility to maximize productivity are doomed.  Such foolish
leadership causes job loss for innocent workers and GNP loss for
the country.  Pick up any paper and you will read about such
lamentable situations every day in almost every industry.  The
President has a role to play to guide management and labor away
from such destructive practices.       

Economic Loyalty

     This is one area where the political leadership in both
parties at every level has failed to call forth America's
capacity to promote its own self-interest.

     Economic loyalty to one's fellow countrymen is not a value
that is fashionable in America today.  To raise the matter in a
public speech is to cause more seat squirming than a discourse on
safe sex.  To suggest it to the generation of the 80's is to
invite barely concealed disdain.

     Yet, what is loyalty to one's country?  What is loyalty to
one's fellow countryman?  What is one's obligation to the larger
societal "family" in times of economic distress?

     If, during the last four decades, I had sent $100 to the
Soviet Union to aid them in their war effort against us I would
have been justly accused of treason.  I would be vilified by both
conservatives and liberals as having aided and abetted a nation
which threatens my country. Properly so.

     If, at the same time, I had sent $40,000 to Japan or Germany
(or Great Britain, etc.) to aid them in their economic war effort
against us, however friendly, I would be totally ignored by
American conservatives.  I would be the recipient of comments
about how nice my Mercedes or Lexus (or Jaguar or Audi or BMW,
etc.) looked.  In addition, there would be absolutely no
suggestion from American liberals that the American auto worker
rendered unemployed by my car purchase decision should be of any
relevance to me.

     We are in the grip of a kind of 1980's loyalty, that is,
loyalty to one's self and one's image with no concern for the
common wealth.  Indeed, to suggest a rethinking of our collective
responsibilities to each other is to encounter extreme
defensiveness.

     This 1980's loyalty is not confined to "Me-Generation" fast
trackers.

     The average corporate chief executive officer is often no
better.  Chances are excellent that he or she drives to work in
an expensive foreign import, dressed to the nines in foreign
shoes and clothing, all the while lamenting the decline of
America's industrial base and the easy availability of capital in
other countries.

     This is where the New American Mandate would seek to change
attitudes.  We used to think that patriotism was supporting our
troops in the Persian Gulf and buying a Mercedes on the same day. 
The New American Mandate would be a lot more comprehensive.

     An American parable for the 1980's is as follows.  A well
paid engineer working for an American company buys an Infiniti. 
Six months later he/she gets a layoff notice because his/her
company can't compete with its Japanese counterpart.  The
engineer drives home in a funk and never, never equates the two
events.

     This is not an argument for a mindless Buy America policy. 
That approach suggested that we buy domestically produced items
irrespective of all other considerations - such as quality and
price.  As the not-so proud owner of a Ford Pinto and Chevy Vega
in my time, I am all too fully aware of the downside of such a
policy.  It promotes the laziness and inefficiency of any
protectionist policy.  It is more compassionate but ultimately
leads to the same kind of inevitable manufacturing base
deterioration.  The incentive to excel is seriously weakened.

     But there are harbors of logical refuge between mindless Buy
America and soulless 1980's non-loyalty.  In between there are
cases where a consumer is faced with choices where the
distinctions are not so obvious.  Economic loyalty is simply
opting to put one's capital towards the strengthening of America,
not the strengthening of another country.  These are cases where
the benefit of the doubt tips the scales in favor of the American
product.

     The recent focus on quality control in American cars, for
example, clearly offers such opportunities today.

     Finally, it should be emphasized that this is not a call for
protectionism or foreign bashing.  These two are the siren's
temptation.  The former is nothing more than the acceptance of
full scale competitive retreat.  It is a warm refuge but only
temporary and eventually fatal.  Erecting protectionist barriers
is counterproductive.  Our efforts should be focused on openness
elsewhere and full reciprocity in world trade.

     The latter is equally dangerous.  It is quite appropriate to
criticize foreign countries when their policies are in error. 
Certainly there is no shortage of selfish and irresponsible
practices carried out by our allies and trading partners.  We
should not be hesitant about pointing these out and calling for
correction.

     Some politicians, however, go beyond this and seek to swim
in the murky waters of demagoguery.  Blaming foreign nations for
our economic woes is standard fare for elected officials because
it is invariably well received - particularly in areas of high
unemployment.  It is a lot more rewarding politically to bash
imports than to suggest that there may be fault in attitudes or
strategies here at home.  This political tactic is avoidance
politics of a different kind.  It allows people to walk away
resenting other nations when they should be demanding changes in
how we do things in America.  By continuing to persist in denial
we put off the necessary self-examination and rethinking that
will lead to true competitiveness.  Thus, the foreign basher
ultimately serves the interests of the foreigner by putting off
the critical day of our own renewal.

     But the issue here is not just economic.  It is social as
well.  A sense among consumers that we care about our fellow
countrymen and are willing to demonstrate economic loyalty in
their behalf strengthens the bonds between us.  Imagine if a
neighbor owned a particular business and you needed to buy a
product sold by such a business.  Is it not natural to want to
give the neighbor your business if at all possible?  Well, this
is the same thing except your neighbor lives further away.

     The issue here is not about where productive economic
loyalty ends and counterproductive Buy America begins.  The issue
is a collective recognition of the economic peril faced by our
country.  It is incorporating that recognition into our daily
lives as a constant thought process.  In the economic war we are
all by definition soldiers because we are consumers.  The issue
is deciding which army we are part of.

     A final thought.  This call for economic loyalty is in
response to our current economic dilemma.  The point here is not
to despise foreign products.  On the contrary, we all need a
viable global economy with the free flow of goods across borders. 
The point is to calibrate our consumer decision making to the
economic conditions prevailing in the country we all call home. 
In other times this would not be as relevant.  In the happy
future it will not be as necessary either.  But in today's
troubled conditions, it is very important.  It is, ironically,
calling upon Americans to begin to think the way Japanese
corporate leaders and German consumers have acted for decades. 
They have viewed this attitude as a kind of deep patriotism. 
Hokey, isn't it?  But who is buying up whose national treasures? 
Their citizens understand economic loyalty instinctively.  It's
about time we did the same.

     We are all part of one team.  And we are tied to the
success, or lack thereof, of all the other members of our team.

     Today an American professor, for example, is paid less than
her German counterpart teaching the same subject matter and more
than her British counterpart.  Since the skills are equivalent,
why are the salaries different?  Very simple.  The German "team"
is doing very well, the American "team" less well and the British
"team" even less well.  The American professor is being dragged
down by the relative lack of success of her "team."  Does that
professor ever think in these terms?  Very doubtful.  But we must
bring about that kind of awareness.

     The role here of our political leadership is to make
Americans aware that if one American worker is thrown overboard,
we are all dragged down just a bit.  The more of our team members
that are cast overboard, the further down we all go.

     What it comes down to is this.  I go to buy a product, let's
say an automobile.  I live in a cold climate and want four-wheel
drive capability.  My choice is narrowed to a Jeep and an Isuzu.
     My judgment will involve issues like style and cost.  But it
doesn't end there.  When I see the Jeep I sense an American
autoworker who will remain employed if I buy it.  I derive a
quiet pleasure knowing that my money will remain in our economy
and multiply.  I instinctively understand that my economic
well-being will eventually be determined by the economic
well-being of every other American.  I think like a Japanese
would.  Or a German would.  I think like an economic patriot.


II.  Education - The Meeting House of Our Society

     America in the 1990's will rise or fall as our public
schools rise or fall.  The health of our school systems is the
major building block determinant of our long term economic and
social viability.   Knowledge is power.  Work skills are power. 
Real power.  Real economic power.  The lack of knowledge and work
skills is weakness.  It is economic impotence.  It is the
transition from greatness to irrelevance.

     Knowledge and work skills are also hope.  They are the only
source of social mobility available to millions of our fellow
citizens.  They are what turns despair into hope.  Only they can
create true opportunity so that young people choose lives of
promise over lives of personal and societal destructiveness.

     Education is America's great calling.

     Education, ah, education.  Everyone is for it.  It is the
motherhood and apple pie issue of the 90's.  Well, at least the
rhetoric would suggest so.  The reality is quite different.

     Republicans talk about it.  President Bush, during the
campaign, said that he wanted to be known as the education
President.  No one would call him that two years later.  Money
for the Persian Gulf and Star Wars and the Stealth bomber?  Sure. 
Money for serious funding of schools?  Gee, that's really a local
and state issue.  Money for serious skills training for
non-college bound students?  Gee, that's not how we think in
America.

     Democrats love to talk about it as well.  As with the
Republicans, the talk is not purposefully false.  It is, in fact,
well intentioned.  But improvements in education to many
Democrats only means a lot more money.  It does not mean serious
structural reform.  Cutting edge issues like merit pay and
teacher competence standards are offensive to some teacher unions
and as a result some Democrats oppose them.  Controversial
experiments like Boston University's takeover of the Chelsea
schools, national testing of high school seniors, school choice,
magnet schools for young black male students, uniforms for public
school students, limiting bilingual education - all make
Democrats very nervous.  This is not to argue that any of these
ideas is valid.  This is to argue that new and radical concepts
need to be tested.  We need an atmosphere where the search for
educational excellence is an objective undiluted by
considerations as to what some interest groups may oppose.

     Businessmen talk about education as well.  They opine about
how critical a well-trained and educated workforce is to their
survival.  Some business leaders - David Kearns of Xerox and John
Akers of IBM come to mind - have become national spokesmen in
behalf of public education.  They have put this issue at the
forefront of their personal agendas and have rendered the nation
a great service by doing so.

     They, however, are not typical.

     Go to the corporate suites of your Fortune 1000 companies
and ask a very simple question of the chief executive officers
and members of the board of directors.  When was the last time
you set foot in a public school classroom?  The answers would
reveal the obvious.  The issue of quality public education does
not enjoy the personal involvement of the very people who
proclaim its vital importance.  And in some cases, they are even
putting their resources toward ballot initiatives that would
reduce taxes and devastate public education.

     Is public education the top priority in America?  Is it the
vehicle to provide true opportunity for those who don't happen to
be affluent?  Is it the only way of having a workforce capable of
competing against its international counterparts?  Is it the
place where our societal values are reinforced, and, sadly, in
some cases, introduced for the first time?

     The answer to these questions must be a resolute "Yes!"
resounding from coast to coast.

     Yes, it means money.  Real money.  It means that when budget
crunches come, public education is not viewed as the obvious 
candidate for slashing.

     Today it is.  As chairman of the Massachusetts Board of
Regents, I saw a Democratic governor cut the public higher
education budget by 22% from 1988 to 1990 while state
appropriations as a whole increased 18%.  Then, in 1991, we found
ourselves with a Republican governor whose staff was seeking ways
to actually close three to five campuses.  Education, thus, has
been an equal opportunity candidate for bi-partisan attack.  Why? 
Well, in Massachusetts both governors were openly pro-education
in their public pronouncements.  That did not prevent the
bloodletting.  Political realities intruded.  There is one
fundamental truth at work here.  Students in K through 12 can't
vote.  And students in public colleges often don't vote.  Unless
these students are protected by their voting elders, in
particular the business community, they are vulnerable because
they have no counterattack capability.

     Making public education a top priority means openness to new
- even radical - notions of educational innovation.  Let's
criticize bold ideas after they have been found to be flawed, 
not before they are tested.

     This means structural reform.  Merit pay and standards of
teacher competence.  School based management.  Uniform testing
standards for graduating seniors.  Parental involvement in
choosing teachers.  Parental and teacher involvement in choosing
principals.  Longer school days.  The powers that be in the
teacher unions must be leaders in bringing about these necessary
changes.  Some already are.  All must be.  The same is true with
school officials, school committees, mayors and city councils.

     Finally, and most fundamentally, it means that all of
America must get to know what the inside of a classroom looks
like.

     Parents are going to have to invest their time in the
buildings where their children are fashioning the dimensions of
their lives.  Teachers are going to have to be assisted.  They
are going to have to be made to feel as important as their task
really  is.  They are also going to have to be scrutinized. 
Parents are going to have to be able to know the differences in
teaching philosophies.  They must learn to tell when a principal
is being creative and caring, and when a principal is just
playing out the string.  Parents are also going to have to see
their role as nurturing children other than their own in these
classrooms.  Parents should help involve retirees and
grandparents in this task as well.  The public schools should
become the meeting houses of our society where all of our society
is walking through the school doors on a regular basis.  This is
the New American Mandate.

     This approach must involve institutions as well as
individuals.  I would suggest the following matrix.  The public
schools (pre-K through 12) are at the center of the matrix. 
Arranged around it are four centers of institutional capability
and energy.  Each of the four focuses its efforts towards the
public school center.  The four are public higher education,
private higher education, non-profit institutions (clergy,
hospitals, museums, foundations, performing arts, etc.) and the
business community.

     What this translates into is the rector, the priest, the
rabbi, the museum director, the lawyer, the executive vice
president, the faculty member, the college hockey coach, the
chief executive officer, the surgeon, the secretary, the shop
foreman, the researcher, the union organizer - all will be in the
classrooms, affirming by their very presence the criticality of
education.

     What do they do there?  Anything.  Everything.  It will
range from a once-a-year reading to a third grade class to
once-a-month tutoring of a particular student.  It will mean a
corporate funded day spent at a college campus to expose sixth
graders to the notion that college may be relevant to them.  It
may mean mentoring a whole class and taking responsibility for
elevating their horizons, their career sightlines.

     Does this make a difference?  That is no longer a question. 
There are staggering examples of outsiders radically affecting
the lives of students whose classes they become part of.  The Dr.
Eugene Lang intervention at his Bronx alma mater junior high
school is the most acclaimed example but there are countless
others.  It works.  Hopefully, we can get to the point where
every student in every classroom has someone beyond the
overloaded teacher caring about his or her future.  That outside
person must attest to the basic truth that as goes public
education so goes America.

     The interface of these people and the classroom will, of
course, change things forever.  Everyone investing his or her
time in a classroom will, by definition, become a committed
advocate for quality education.  This will translate into real
political power in  behalf of the educational system.  It will
also translate into corporate and non-corporate resources being
funneled to the system.

     To educators, that is the good news.  More threatening will
be the sense of overview, and the realization that these
outsiders will be rendering judgements about the performance of
teachers and administrators.  Some will balk at this, unsure of
this brave new world.  They cannot be allowed to prevail.

     These intervenors should be seen as a wonderful resource. 
They can help seek out technical assistance relationships with
colleges and corporations, both as to teaching theories as well
as management techniques.

     It will be a different world.  Committed, competent teachers
and administrators will welcome the respect and caring.  The new
found availability of resources will strengthen their sense of
the relevance of their profession.

     The political leaders must by their personal actions bring
about this "meetinghouse of our society."  That's how one becomes
the education President or the education Governor or the
education Congressman.  The President must be willing to devote
considerable personal time to make this happen.  It must be an
unrelenting theme.  The President must be the Principal-In-Chief.
New Educational Needs

     There are two areas where the discussion on education has
finally begun to focus.

     First is the pre-kindergarten stage.  More and more it is
becoming obvious that the experiences of a child at the youngest
ages predetermines his or her capacity to learn in a school
setting.  Youngsters arriving at school from dysfunctional
families are immediately at a disadvantage.  There is a much
greater likelihood of their academic efforts being rendered
futile before they even begin.

     We are going to have to focus resources on children from
difficult environments in the pre-kindergarten years (ala
Headstart) and during the after-school hours when these children
confront the reality of empty apartments and homes.

     The second area of new focus is skills training.  There is
now a steady drumbeat from observers that the great shortfall in
American education involves not the student who goes to college
but the student who doesn't.  It is the "non-college bound
post-secondary gap."

     The great economic challenge that we face will be fought in
the trenches of the workplace.  It will be a competition of
skills.  There will be a direct link between the skills of the
nation's workforce and the resultant standard of living of that
nation.  Manufacturers will go where the workforce is the most
highly skilled, no matter where that may be.  This is not a
matter of choice for them.  It is a matter of being competitive.

     If our non-supervisory workers are less skilled than their
foreign counterparts they will be paid wages that reflect that
reality.  Third world skills will command third world wages. 
Highly paid jobs will move offshore and we will be left with the
unattractive residuals.

     And, if our workforce continues to experience deterioration
of wage scales the rest of the economy will deteriorate as well. 
Thus, in this new world economic order it is not just the
capacity of the highly educated which determines our fate, it is
the skill levels of the basic worker as well.  A skilled American
workforce will provide good jobs for educated managers and
professionals.  An unskilled American workforce will not.  The
whole system implodes together.

     Not surprisingly, our competitors have discovered this
already.  In Japan, skills are learned in the companies because
the companies expect workers to remain with them for the duration
of their careers.  In America, the reality of three year worker
turnover causes our companies to be wary of such an investment. 
In Germany, the school system coordinates this effort and
students are in school/work situations at the age of sixteen.  In
France, companies are taxed 1% on their sales.  If they do worker
training they don't pay the tax.  If they don't, they pay the tax
and the government does the training.

     Three models to achieve the same critical end.  We have
allowed this need to escape serious attention until recently.  I
believe the French model deserves consideration but adapted to
the American context with its vocational technical schools and
community colleges taking the lead.

     This is a constructive approach to a problem that confronts
us.  For Democrats, it is far better to pursue this option than
to criticize companies for moving their operations offshore. 
Such criticism will never have a beneficial effect.  Companies
are never going to forego profitability and competitiveness in
order to placate Democratic outrage.  These companies are not
being un-American, they are simply responding to a perceived
differential in the quality of the workforce.  To forestall such
moves, we have only to provide a workforce that is equally
skilled.  Certainly for reasons of logistics and management
control, any American company would prefer to have its operations
as close by as possible.  And finally, it has been my experience
that American CEO's are more nationalistic than they are given
credit for.  They want a stronger America.  It's our job to help
them make the decision that's right for America without
diminishing the viability of their companies.


III.  The Environment - Equilibrium With Earth

     There has always been an environmental constituency.  Unlike
many interest groups its objective has historically not been its
own economic well-being.  Its goal has been the preservation of
nature, a sense of being at one with the land and water and air
and all the creatures which co-inhabit this planet.

     That core environmental constituency has been a political
bedrock, hundreds of thousands, indeed, millions of people,
feeling very strongly about the legitimacy of their cause.

     What is different about this issue in the modern day is the
newly recruited battalions to the environmentalist army and the
breadth of their concerns.  The historic group (begun in large
part by moderate Republicans) is sometimes dismissed as
"tree-huggers."  (It is ironic that someone's love of a tree
could be viewed as a negative characteristic.)  The modern
coalition, however, involves people whose interests are much
closer to home.  It involves citizens who have been affected by
toxic dump sites or air pollution or have come to fear the
quality of the water they drink.  These newly minted
conservationists are going to be no less committed to the cause
of environmental protection.  Indeed, in many respects they bring
a kind of passion that has been sometimes absent.  A despoiled
earth will not be tolerated by human beings dependent upon a
clean earth for survival.

     Now there is a third group in this coalition.

     This group is largely a time-of-being phenomenon.  It is the
post-Cold War generation.  If one sees generations in terms of
time frames and definitive events, the progression in recent
times arguably would be Depression/World War II, Cold War, and
Vietnam/Civil Rights/Nuclear War.

     When the Berlin Wall came crashing down, the spectre of
East-West nuclear confrontation was rendered highly improbable. 
The young people now coming of age know, and will only know, the
return of democracy to Eastern Europe and the centrifugal forces
at play in a weakened Soviet Union.

     An era has passed and with it much of the fear of a
superpower caused nuclear winter.

     As this generation analyzes the world in which it will
mature and live out its years, it does not perceive a world of
calm and quietude.  It perceives other dislocations.  And one of
the most severe stems from the mindless abuse of our planet by
generations focused on other issues.  This new generation sees a
world of possible climatic cataclysm, of a world buried in its
own excessive trash, a world where the air they will breath will
threaten the health of themselves and of the children they are
beginning to bear.  They see virgin forests of antiquity falling
to greed.  And they see population growth which threatens to turn
the future of mankind into an endless series of bloody clashes
over ever-limited resources.

     Simply put, they sense global disequilibrium.  The earth is
not at peace with its inhabitants.  We are consuming resources at
a rate which is not generationably sustainable.  We see
population growth rendering third world cities dysfunctional.  We
are despoiling this mother spaceship and will eventually render
it hostile to human well-being.

     Our young think differently than we do.  As we get older the
time frame we think in shrinks because our remaining time on
earth has lessened.

     Not so the young.  With their sense of their own immortality
they can look out and see forever.  A planet in disequilibrium is
hazy to short-term focused adults.  It is alarmingly clear to our
offspring.  They know they will inherit the consequences.

     I learned this lesson soon after the Valdez oil spill in
Alaska.  I was driving through Chatham on Cape Cod and noticed
that I needed gasoline.  Without much thought I turned into the
nearest service station and pulled up next to the pumps.  There
came an immediate howl from my three children.  I had stopped at
an Exxon station.  They demanded that I drive away.

     My response to them was that this particular gas station
owner had no responsibility for the oil spill.  They rejected
that argument as irrelevant.  I was patronizing a despoiler of
the environment.  No more.  No less.  Their voices reached an
insistent crescendo of righteousness and I decided to drive off
to calm the din.

     The incident troubled me.  As the Senate co-author of the
Alaska Lands Act, I have always seen myself as an ardent and
committed environmentalist.  I always saw myself as the defender
of Alaska's wonders.  My children, however, were beyond me in
their sensitivity.  How different from what I thought about when
I was their age.  They had become dedicated environmental
activists and I had never noticed.

     We should welcome their alarm.  It calls us to a true
stewardship of our environment.  And such a stewardship is
uniquely American.  We are the continental nation.  Descendants
of Teddy Roosevelt and Ansel Adams.  We should see this calling
as returning home to what we are truly all about.

     Specifically what?

International Leadership

     It is appalling that we were the most notable footdraggers
at the recent international convention on global warming.  So
much for George Bush being the environmental President.  We must
lead the charge for global conservationism.  If not us, who?  If
not now, when?

     Washington has true champions of the environment in the
House and Senate and in the EPA.  Let the White House use its
influence to spread that commitment throughout the land and
across this globe.  Let the New American Mandate establish the
principle that love of earth is mainstream America, a reflection
of the best of us in all of us.

     The vehicle for doing this would be to proclaim the goal of
global equilibrium.  This means the pursuit of policies and
lifestyles that allow the consumption of resources to be
consistent with having an inhabitable planet over the
generations.

     The issues here are obvious.  Global warming and the
depletion of the ozone layer are the most noted but they are
merely the tip of the melting iceberg.  These two issues deserve
the highest level of attention and concern rather than the
jittery avoidance that has characterized the Reagan-Bush years. 
I chaired the first hearings on global warming as a Congressman
in June, 1977.  It was an issue that was obscure to some, but all
too relevant to those who testified.  In the absence of any White
House or media concern the matter remained dormant until the very
hot summer of 1988.  All of a sudden it was a topic of popular
discourse.  That is not how serious issues should be confronted. 
The White House needs to establish a national dialogue on the
scientific data.  Pretending that these matters are secondary is
risking the lives of millions of people should they ever  come to
pass.

A recycling ethic

     Ancient history is often marked by great events that took
place at large feasts or simple small repasts.  From the tales of
Homer in ancient Greece to the beginnings of the world's great
faiths, history was often made when people broke bread together.
     The archeologists of today are unable to find virtually any
artifacts from those events.

     But the archeologists in the year 2991 will be able to
unearth artifacts of millions upon millions of meals consumed in
1991.  They need only go to the local landfill and dig a bit. 
There they will discover the true artifact of our time - the
disposable, once used, plastic utensil.  In addition, they will
find all kinds of commodities specifically designed to be thrown
away rather than repaired when they are broken.

     The age of the disposable society must give way to the age
of recycling.

     Recycling must become as much an automatic personal habit as
brushing one's teeth.  Again, here, as in other issues referred
to previously, it is a matter of mindset.

     Such a mindset already exists.  But its existence is
inversely proportional to the age of the person.  The young do
not thoughtlessly dispose of aluminum cans into trash cans as do
many of their parents.  They want to collect them for recycling.
 
     There is great promise here.  As a member of the Recycling
Advisory Council, I am struck at how willing corporate America is
to move in this direction.  In many respects they are far ahead
of the politicians.  Much is happening.  Americans instinctively
want to be in harmony with their environment..  A clear call for
sustainable lifestyles will be received with great response.  Let
us sound that call.

     Such a call has to be backed up by government procurement
policies at the local, state and federal level that give real
preference to recycled products.  This will help to establish
markets that are now often fledgling and vulnerable.

     It means introducing a virgin materials fee.  This would
give recycled commodities only a slight economic competitive
advantage over virgin products, but it would set a tone as to the
need for manufacturers to rethink procurement practices.  The
proceeds from such a fee would be channeled to help with
recycling and disposal costs.

     It means setting up a commission to establish a consistent
standard for consumer guidance so that a "green" label or a
"recycling" label has specific meaning and consumers can express
their environmentalism with their pocketbooks.  There can be no
doubt that environmental consumerism is the nuclear weapon of
recycling.  It only needs specific guidelines in order to be
fully unleashed.  Once this happens, the market will respond
accordingly.  Only by having functioning markets for recycled
goods can we hope to achieve any worthwhile level of recycling.

     It means establishing product design standards to maximize
recyclability.

     It means policies that minimize waste materials in the
manufacturing processes of American companies.

     It means packaging standards that result in the least use of
throw-away materials and the greatest use of containers that are
earth friendly.

     The objective of all these policies should be to create a
mindset of avid consumer and governmental activism so that an
equilibrium lifestyle becomes a simple matter of every day habit
and behavior.

Global Warming

     The issues here are well known.  We need energy policies
which maximize the investment in conservation and renewables and
which minimize the burning of those fossil fuels which cause the
greatest emissions.  On the cutting edge here are the utilities. 
Federal and state regulatory policies should tie a utility's rate
of return to its commitment to energy conservation and the
encouragement of renewable energy sources.  The loss of a
utility's revenue base caused by using less fossil fuel based
energy should result in a net plus in the utility's rate of
return.  That rate of return should be above that which could be
achieved by the usual standards of proper financial and technical
management.  Utilities must be put in a position to maximize
their shareholders' value by aggressively and relentlessly
pursuing policies consistent with the need to reduce global
warming.

     We also need policies which maximize the planting of carbon
dioxide consuming trees both in America and worldwide and which
minimize the need to cut down existing trees anywhere.  There are
going to have to be serious discussions about how to save
tropical rain forests which are so vital to any effort to lessen
the buildup of carbon dioxide.  Telling countries not to demolish
their forests is as effective as their telling us to reduce our
energy consumption.  These countries will not adopt policies
which benefit mankind but go against their national economic self
interests.  The developed world has to be prepared to tip the
economic scales in exchange for the obvious benefits it will
receive.  This is an area where we can turn to the Japanese and
Germans and ask them to take the lead.  They had all sorts of
reasons for bypassing the Persian Gulf war.  We expended our
resources to safeguard their interests.  Here is an opportunity
for them to do the same for all of us in preserving the great
forests in the developing world.  A planet threatened by rising
oceans is in no less peril than one threatened by a Saddam
Hussein.  This is a brave new world and quite uncomfortable.  But
global warming isn't very comfortable either.

     Planting trees should be a national passion.  It should be a
normal and recurring event at schools, in city parks, at
factories, in backyards and front yards.  The President should
make this a standard ceremony when visiting various parts of the
country.  It would be a ceremony with real moral purpose - a
purpose instinctively understood by our young.

     The earlier section on recycling is applicable here since it
is the use of wood products to make paper which consumes an
enormous number of trees.  We must get to the point where the
paper we write on, the newspapers we read, and the circulars we
receive in the mail are all printed on recycled paper.

     One major obstacle here will be some in the press since the
commitment to environmentalism in the editorial department is
sometimes not matched by the vice-president of business
operations.  The latter will go on for hours on why today's high
speed newspaper printing process cannot use recycled paper due to
lessened fiber strength.

     Come on, fourth estate.  Let's see total leadership here.

Land Use

     Loss of woodlands, open space and farm land is the result of
investment dollars being used for development.  The implosion of
many of our urban centers is the result of an absence of
investment dollars being used for development.

     We deplore the loss of the natural landscape.

     We deplore the decline of our urban centers.

     Since neither has to occur, there must be a better way.

     Development dollars flow in very prescribed channels.  As a
partner in a development company, I know this all too well. 
Forming these channels are tax laws, zoning regulations,
investment incentives, and land use policies such as height
restrictions, green space requirements, and the like.  Government
sets the channels and the market place responds accordingly. 
Developers go where government tells them to go whether or not it
makes any sense.  The battle over development pits
conservationists against developers.  It should be
conservationists against government officials since the
developers are only building where and what the laws allow.

     The late 1980's saw this truth play itself out on Cape Cod. 
As chairman of a state environmental task force I had proposed
the idea of a moratorium on development on the Cape.  The notion
created a firestorm and I was vilified by developers and town
officials and state legislators.  They deemed the idea
irresponsible and stated their strong belief that it would die of
its own illogic.  No elected officials beyond a few isolated
selectmen came to my defense.  The Boston political establishment
was nowhere to be found.

     Then a funny thing happened.  The Boston Globe did a poll
and found that two-thirds of the Cape inhabitants supported the
concept and fully three-fourths endorsed the regional land use
planning proposal known as the Cape Cod Planning Commission. 
This revelation raised the political stakes considerably.

     When I scheduled a hearing at Cape Cod Community College, I
was picketed and heckled at by hundreds of developers and
construction workers.  In response, the Cape's conservationist
community began to organize in earnest and the battles lines were
drawn.  Charges and countercharges were the order of the day and
soon no one was safe from the controversy.

     The issues were placed on the ballot and we won handily.  In
a subsequent 1990 special election, the planning commission was
enacted into law despite a severe economic downturn that had seen
development come to a virtual halt.

     In the end, the developers saw me and the conservationists
as the enemy.  The conservationists, in turn, saw the developers
as the enemy.  I, however, did not blame the developers.  They
were only trying to make a living.  I blamed the elected town
officials who had determined the rules of the game.  They were
the ones who had allowed unconstrained development that was at
variance with the wishes of their constituents.  They could have
prevented the abuses by voting the appropriate safeguards.  They
chose not to.  As a result, the battle between developers and the
conservationist community was unavoidable.  It could have been
otherwise.  It should have been otherwise.

     It serves little purpose to constantly have these battles
over development issues.  The end result is often exhaustion,
bitterness and/or bankruptcy.  It would be far better to
establish land use guidelines that everyone understands and which
reflect a community's consensus.  That is what political
leadership is paid to do.

     The reason that all this means something has to do with two
values.  First, it is the preservation of the land that God gave
to us.  There is a spirituality to our surroundings.  Primitive
people understand this.  Modernized people often don't. 
Secondly, it is the retention of the unique character of all the
places which make up America.  It is who we are as contrasted to
who everyone else in the world is.

     The role of the Federal government here is primarily to
articulate the importance of these values and to adopt policies
that support its position.  These are essentially local and state
matters, but the feds should also look at their own approaches. 
It should do a systematic analysis of existing federal tax laws
(such as the various depletion allowances) to see if they are
incompatible with these values .  It should also reexamine the
adequacy of tax and funding policies which would direct
investment away from open space to our urban centers (such as
historic preservation tax credits, urban enterprise zones, UDAG
grants, etc.)

     It should further look for other opportunities to preserve
open space.  The scheduled closure of some of our military bases
that was announced recently would be such an opportunity.

     Finally, it should encourage mayors and governors and
legislatures and city councils to consider the issue more
pointedly.  Visits to places that have preserved land or retained
a sense of character should be high on the agenda of top
governmental officials, including the President and Vice
President.

     Again, as in previous sections, the above is not meant to be
exhaustive of policy initiatives but rather is suggestive of a
philosophy that would cause us to constantly think in terms of an
equilibrium with the earth.

Population Control

     Nothing would serve the cause of environmental equilibrium
as much as population control.  Nothing would insure
environmental  disequilibrium as much as the world's population
growing uncontrollably.  The same can be said relative to the
issues of energy use and world social order.

     The earth is simply not capable of accommodating endless
human expansion.  We are increasing at a rate of 93 million
people a year.  In 1830 there were one billion people.  In 1990
there are 5.3 billion.  Within the next decade we will increase
population equivalent to all the inhabitants of Africa and South
America combined.  Towns have become cities.  And cities have
become megalopolises.  It cannot continue.

     The dilemma is not food.  We can produce enough to feed the
world's current population.  People starve today because of
political instability and the failure of food distribution
systems.  The starvation in Ethiopia and the Sudan is made even
more tragic by the fact that it need not be.

     The real dilemma of unconstrained population growth is
three-fold.

     First, while food stuffs can be produced every year into
infinity, fossil fuel energy cannot.  The earth is energy
resource limited and those limits are very real.  (More on this
in the next section.)

     Secondly, the world's burgeoning population is streaming
into the major cities, particularly in the third world, and
rendering those cities virtually unworkable.  This is a formula
for great social and political upheaval in the wake of serious
degradation of even the most basic quality of life in those
cities.

     Thirdly, the growing consumption of, and demand for, natural
resources is virtually unsustainable.  There is just so much
clean air.  Just so much clean water.  Just so many available
landfills.  Just so many ways to dispose of hazardous wastes. 
The land and the oceans are receiving unspeakable volumes of
waste each and every day.  The earth was never meant to be a
giant waste disposal unit.  To pretend that it can is to threaten
human survival.

     None of this is new.  No one doubts the inevitable
consequences of unlimited population expansion.  So why don't we
take it seriously?

     The reason, very simply, is domestic politics.  The
Reagan-Bush years have been marked by open hostility to family
planning worldwide.  While the Democrats supported such efforts
as quietly as possible hoping no one would notice, the
Republicans saw it as a clear opportunity to placate domestic
political interest groups.

     The Reagan-Bush approach has bought marvelous political
self-benefit at the expense of future social dislocation.  And
they don't care one bit.

     We Democrats must care.  Our obligation lies beyond the
Roger Ailes perspective.  We will be judged in future years by
how  well and how forcefully we began the drive for a stable
world population.  In this regard the New American Mandate is a
moral imperative that is worldwide in its responsibility.


IV.  Energy, Fossil Fuels - Someday There Won't Be Any

     There are two basic realities about energy facing Americans. 
First, we have no national energy policy (presuming that
importing oil does not qualify as such a policy).  Sadly, it took
the war in the Persian Gulf to again make this obvious.  The
1980's decade of energy issue avoidance has hopefully come to an
end although the White House may be the last to acknowledge it. 
Second, our energy use is based almost exclusively upon the
consumption of finite energy resources (particularly oil) and
that is, by definition, unsustainable over the long term.   This
will eventually create ever-deepening crises of supply and cause
desperate and powerful nations to seek to acquire remaining oil
reserves by force.  All of this was foreseen long ago by energy
and military analysts.  Again, witness the Persian Gulf where the
world's dependence upon foreign oil reserves greatly raised the
stakes in the current confrontation.

     Put it another way.  The earth has provided  a finite amount
of fossil fuels for its inhabitants.  The number of inhabitants
rises every year increasing total energy use.  The per capita
consumption of these fossil fuels also increases as more and more
countries become industrialized and as more and more people enjoy
energy-intensive lifestyles.  This dilemma will not be solved by
asking developing countries to forego comforts which we take for
granted.

     Every year the total energy use is subtracted from what the
earth started out with.  Since supply is always heading downward
and use is always heading upward, sooner or later what the
nations need will not be available.  At first, prices that are
confiscatory beyond measure will mean that the rich will have
energy resources and the poor will not.  But even that inequity
will not be sustainable as each year drains more fossil fuels. 
Eventually even supply at any price will not be possible. 
Nations will continually go to war to survive.  Today that is
self-evident.

     To make matters worse, most of the earth's readily
obtainable oil reserves are in one of the most unstable areas of
the world politically.  Thus the prospect of war exists into the
future, long after Saddam Hussein has passed from the scene.

     The discussion of this issue reveals the limited capacity of
middle-aged decision makers to think in terms beyond their
expected lifespans.  When 55 year oil experts talk in glowing
terms about a 50 year supply of that resource, that means they
are confident of supply during their expected natural lives. 
That is reassuring.  It is, however, less reassuring to their 25
year old children who are not certain they will have died by the
age of 75.  It is obviously not at all reassuring to their five
year old grandchildren.

     Let's up the estimate to 100 years.  Nothing changes in
respect to our moral obligation not to visit certain calamity
upon future generations.  This is where the issue of purpose
comes into play.  This is where the New American Mandate comes
into play.

     If we are dealing with a finite resource; if we are
depleting that resource; and if we are not aggressively pursuing
policies to bring about energy use based on renewables; then we
are condemning a future generation to the unspeakable.  Which
generation?  Who knows?  The next one or the one after that or
the one after that?  The moral burden does not lift; our purpose
must be to assure the survival of those future generations.

     We need a national energy policy.

     Such a policy must view current use patterns as
unacceptable, particularly the return to overreliance upon
imported oil.

     It must view the long term goal as minimizing finite
resource use, again, especially oil.  The future must be based
upon energy resources that are sustainable.

     One mission is to get from here to there in as smooth a
transition as possible.  That will take decades, intense
investment, rethinking, and lifestyle modification.  The
alternative is to request that God replace all the oil and gas
that we've consumed.  That would certainly be a lot easier but in
case He chooses to let us resolve this matter by ourselves, an
energy policy will be required.

Yearly Supply-Demand Report

     The reasons the country doesn't have an energy policy are
complex.  But one reason stems from the fact that the general
public has little idea how much oil, gas and coal reserves we
have in this country.  There are experts who know - or think they
know - but the average person is just never brought into the
discussion.

     There should be an annual Supply-Demand Report detailing the
best estimates of oil, gas and coal reserves.  Such data
collection is already being done.  But it is buried.  This report
should be the subject of focused presidential attention and
annual Congressional hearings.

     The purpose here is simple.  If there are actions required
to be taken in order to secure our energy future, they will only
be accepted if the people of this nation know the true facts. 
During the 1980's we reverted back to extreme foreign oil
dependence but it was done silently.  Few people in the Congress
or on Main Street were aware that oil imports in 1990 averaged
42%, their highest level since 1979 and up from 35% in 1973.  Oil
from the Persian Gulf accounted for 24% of all U.S. oil imports
in 1989, up from 17% in 1987.  The Reagan-Bush administrations
saw no need to make reference to or bring these facts forcefully
to the attention of the public.  Avoidance politics prevailed
once more.

     Then, all of a sudden, we are at war in the Persian Gulf and
oil is a critical cause of our involvement.  The yearly debate
over the Supply-Demand Report would educate both government
officials and the general public if it were given due notice when
it is released.

Maximize Conservation

     This one is self-evident.  Every barrel of oil not consumed
is a barrel of oil preserved for future generations.  Every MCF
of gas not burned, every ton of coal - all are stored in loving
deference to our descendants.  This is the New American Mandate
extended to those future Americans whose viability is in our
hands.  Conservation has become more mainstream, largely free
from the early notions that it was somewhat "soft."  In those
days real tough men produced energy.  Conservation was the domain
of the timid little old tree hugger ladies and unwashed hippies. 
Today it is the domain of corporate CEO's who see the savings to
their bottom lines.

     Mainstream, however, is not enough.  It must become the
number one energy priority.  This means a return to the debates
of yesteryear - efficiency standards, tax credits.  It also means
higher rates of return for utilities that maximize their
commitment to conservation and load management and a lesser rate
of return for utilities that don't.  Such a rate differential
should be significant enough to thoroughly incentivize utility
CEO's.  These companies are our most effective energy army and
they are already deployed.  Using them is far preferable to
devising new untested approaches using public employees.

     And it can be done.  When I became a director of Boston
Edison in 1985 I was a committed conservationist coming into a
company that was known to be hostile to any of the so-called
demand side management options.

     The outside environmental community - and the state
Department of Public Utilities - had harshly criticized Boston
Edison for its attitude.  I shared much of their perspective and
struggled inside the board to bring about change.  This effort
led to much company turmoil and in the end to serious management
changes.

     Boston Edison is now a recognized leader in demand side
management.  But the lesson here is not the obvious one.  Yes,
there was inertia.  Yes, there was resentment against policies
advocated by people who were always critical anyway.  But I
believe the major resistance was pure market place.  The
regulators and environmentalists were calling upon Edison to
pursue policies that were at variance with the cherished
principles of market share retention and resultant shareholder
value.  They were being asked to use their resources to shrink
their revenue base.  It was totally counter intuitive for people
who had spent their careers concerned about profitability.

     This fierce resistance can instantly become fierce support
if regulators just change the rules.  To truly maximize
conservation we must make it in the economic self-interest of
utilities to become devoted conservationists.

     Conservation also means higher gasoline prices.  As usual,
George Bush blanches when asked to do this by his energy policy
advisers.  His recently announced energy policy is warmed over
Reagan with production taking center stage and conservation
belittled.  It is a sad lesson of American politics that a
President would send troops to defend oil rich nations but not be
willing to take the tough political steps necessary to reduce
domestic oil demand.  I understand the politics.  It's just the
ethics that I can't fathom.  Washington should have a predictable
policy of raising the Federal excise tax on gasoline.  It should
be raised a certain amount each year, every year, so that
consumers can make sensible decisions about the cars they will
drive before the annual increases go into effect.  Three to five
cents a year each year would be one possibility.  Nothing, but
nothing, promotes the purchase of fuel efficient cars like
anticipated higher gas prices.  That is an unavoidable fact of
life.  It has been years since automobile ads spoke of fuel
efficiency.  All of today's ads speak of acceleration and power
and mightiness.  While this measure will not be well-received, a
three to five cents a year annual increase would not begin to
reach today's tax levels in virtually all other Western nations. 
Japan, Germany and Italy, for example, have gas prices exceeding
$3 a gallon.  They have faced the issue.  We have only just
begun.  The loss of American lives in the Persian Gulf is an
unacceptable price to pay for the once-understandable desire to
keep gas prices low.  Our need to lessen oil import dependence
should no longer be a national objective supported by lofty
rhetoric but devoid of the meaningful actions needed to
accomplish that objective.

     It also means higher federal taxes on fuel inefficient
automobiles that are then rebated, dollar for dollar, to
purchasers of fuel efficient automobiles.  The consumer buying a
car consistent with our national energy policy should be
subsidized by the consumer buying a car at variance with that
policy.

     Finally, it means greater investments in mass transit and
the rail system.  These would be funded by the gas tax.  Again,
those who use energy efficient means should be rewarded for such
use.  It is astonishing to think that we are still debating how
much should be allocated to mass transit as opposed to new
highways.  This debate can only happen in an atmosphere wherein
no national energy policy exists.

     These measures must be matched by all-out efforts to achieve
conservation internationally.  The electricity and transportation
systems are particularly inefficient in many third world
countries.  The United Nations must put this effort at the top of
their energy funding agenda.  We must cause this to happen.

Maximize Renewables

     This is the future.  Solar, wind, hydro, etc.  We were on
the road to making these technologies viable when the Reagan
administration blew away the funding for them.  There is an
enormous amount of research and development necessary before some
of these technologies become truly affordable and operational. 
But in terms of long-term national security interest, the Gulf
crisis should make it clear that energy dependence is no bargain. 
Better to spend billions to make those technologies viable than
to spend many more billions funding the consequences of energy
dependence.

     Here again the utilities are prime-time players.  Utilities
that aggressively promote these technologies should enjoy a
higher rate of return than those that don't.

     Finally, it should be noted that every dollar spent on
renewables (and conservation) remains in the economy and
multiplies.  To the extent that American-based solutions exist,
they should be preferred over imported solutions in pursuit of
the simple goal of keeping U.S. dollars at home.  Thus, a dollar
paid to an installer of insulation or invested in a wind energy
project stays here and circulates.  The benefit of that over
sending a dollar overseas to purchase oil is not insignificant.

Research into Nuclear Options

     This one is not self-evident.  But it is necessary
nonetheless.  Let's say we maximize conservation and renewables
tomorrow.  Let's also agree that by doing so we have stretched
out the fossil fuel reserves by twenty, fifty, even one hundred
years.  There's still a very real problem.  We will never arrive
at a time of energy use based solely on renewables.

     There must be a major base load energy capability that is
sustainable.  Inevitably that capability has to be nuclear.  The
fact that this is an unhappy reality does not make it any less of
a reality.  The other base-load alternative is massive reliance
on coal, and that is not possible in an era of real concern over
global warming caused by carbon dioxide emissions.

     Every nuclear power plant operating in the world today
represents millions of barrels of oil not consumed.  Indeed, one
can, ironically, argue that we have served our descendants by the
use of nuclear power since they will inherit the oil we did not
use.  Each plant also represents tens of millions of dollars not
sent to OPEC but kept in the American economy.  This call for
nuclear power, of course, goes against every instinct of most
environmentalists.  It also offends those concerned with the
issue of nuclear safety and the attendant issue of the disposal
of nuclear waste.  These concerns are very real and will never
disappear.

     When I was struggling with the issue of nuclear power as a
Congressman and Senator in the 1970's, there was furious debate
among my staff members and outside advisors.  The split saw my
strong environmental supporters aligned with my political
advisors.  The argument was clear.  Environmentalists were
fiercely anti-nuclear.  They were my most dedicated loyalists. 
And they had valid concerns that were always being casually
dismissed by utilities and governments alike.  Being anti-nuclear
would be substantively correct and politically beneficial.

     On the other side was my energy staff person.  He was not
unsympathetic to the logic arrayed against him.  He thought the
nuclear industry and the utilities had been mindless, stubborn
and reactionary.  He thought that they had become their own worst
enemy for good reason.

     But, he asked, if you eliminate nuclear what do you put in
its stead?  What exactly is the replacement process for shutting
down the nuclear option?  Tell me specifically what substitutes
for what.
     At first we provided the expected response about
conservation and renewables.  But when you tried to put numbers
on them, there was a huge gap no matter how aggressively we
pushed these options.

     That left oil, gas and coal.  All were finite and oil and
coal had particular problems if you overloaded the system with
them.  While gas would be a clean energy source it would not
substitute for everything else.

     In the end, there were no open doors left.

     Accepting this was excruciating.  Politically it was all
downside.  It remains the most difficult and uncomfortable policy
position I have ever taken.  But today, more than a decade later,
I still feel the same way.

     That doesn't eliminate the real problems with nuclear
energy.  But they have to be viewed in context.

     It is much easier to have those concerns dominate our policy
since they are immediate, and the dire consequences that are the
focus of this paper may be decades away.  My responsibility is to
today, of course, but it is even stronger to those who have not
lived the half century I have enjoyed.  A policy that disregards
the viability of our descendants is a policy of no moral value. 
This looking beyond ourselves is part of the return to purpose.

     Further, it should be noted that the greenhouse effect is a
compelling argument by itself for nuclear power.  If the buildup
of carbon dioxide is indeed a threat to the world's climate, then
an energy source which produces no carbon dioxide should have
some currency.  This is an extremely difficult divide for
environmentalists to cross.  But the debate has begun.

     It's a matter of evaluating risks.  The risk of a nuclear
accident is quite knowable.  The risk of rising oceans has never
been experienced and thus elicits no strong fears.  But one can
begin to imagine the dimensions of such a calamity.  For me I
choose to take the greenhouse effect very seriously.  I hope I'm
wrong.

     Finally, it is interesting to see how differently
governments have treated this issue of nuclear power.  France is
a country ruled by the liberal Socialist Party yet is driving
toward virtually full dependence upon nuclear power.  They see it
as freedom from oil dependence and an end to the financial
hemorrhaging of that dependence.

     Japan and South Korea are strong adherents of nuclear as
their electricity producer.

     Germany is ruled by the conservative Christian Democrats yet
has closed off the nuclear option.  Others have as well.

     In the long run which countries will benefit?  In my mind,
the French have done the most to secure their energy future. 
They have decided upon a course which if followed by other
nations will render the Persian Gulf less critical and thereby
less likely to result in the kind of dilemma we now face there. 
It will result in less oil demand, thereby reducing world oil
prices and thus lessening the dollars spent on such oil. 
Finally, and most importantly, it results in oil never being
consumed as nuclear plants take the place of oil-fired units. 
The savings herein are staggering.  Oil Imports in 1989 accounted
for $45 billion of our $109 billion trade deficit.  The 112
nuclear plants operating that year in the U.S. saved 740,000
barrels of oil per day.  That cut our 1989 oil import bill by
$4.7 billion or about 10%.  Since 1973, nuclear plants have
reduced our trade deficit by a total of $125 billion.  As oil
prices increase over time the trade deficit reduction potential
of nuclear power will only increase.  These are enormous economic
factors which cannot and should not be brushed aside, especially
by a nation with chronic and massive trade deficits, more than
one third of which is strictly due to oil imports.

     There are, however,  two valid arguments against nuclear
power.  First, it is just another avenue to avoid the
conservation and renewable policies that must come first.  True. 
Any nuclear option must follow conservation and renewables.  Any
attempt to move to nuclear without recognizing this maxim is
properly doomed to failure.  This reality has been told to the
nuclear industry for years but has had no impact as they continue
to view nuclear development as a sainted option and conservation
and renewables as latter-day appeasement of wooly headed
environmentalists.  This attitude has served them very poorly
indeed.

     Secondly, the technologies appropriate for the future are
not in place.  There is merit to this argument.  The American
nuclear industry consists of scores of nuclear power plants,
virtually all of which are different from one another.  The
inefficiencies and hazards of this reality are not to be taken
lightly.  If every nuclear power plant is custom-made there will
always be problems since every plant has its own distinct
learning curve.

     The nuclear industry and the utilities have been foolish in
ignoring these legitimate criticisms.  They refused to rethink
how the nuclear option could be perfected and instead chose to
defend and perpetuate past practices.  They gave opponents no
reason to hope that critical self-analysis was possible.  As a
result, today the industry lies in disarray.

     The new nuclear age will require technologies in nuclear
fission which allow for smaller, safer, modular power plants in
limited design options.  Knowledge will have to be transferrable
so that talented personnel will be transferrable.

     There will not be any more 1200 megawatt power plants.  They
are too costly and no utility in this day and age is going to
take the risk of building one.  Nor should they.  In this case,
smaller is indeed better.  The future is in the 300-500 megawatt
range.  What about cost?  They will be expensive but the case for
nuclear is not its cost.  It is preserving fossil fuels,
lessening the hazards of oil dependence, reducing the trade
deficit  and minimizing carbon dioxide output.  The federal
government is going to have to invest in developing these new
prototypes in concert with industry.  There must be a sharing of
the financial risk in order to move rapidly.  This joint venture
would seek the development of two or three prototype models based
on today's design and engineering capability rather than attempt
to add bells and whistles onto twenty to thirty year old
blueprints.

     What about the disposal of nuclear wastes?  This is not a
simple matter since we are talking about materials that will long
outlive us.  But the problem already exists.  It exists outside
the nuclear power industry because of military uses primarily,
but also research and medical applications as well.  Given the
choice of finding a technological solution to limited amounts of
nuclear waste and finding a technological solution to massive
quantities of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, I will choose the
former.  Not because its easy but because the latter is undoable.

     But the fact remains that the disposal issue has been
brushed aside.  To advocate for nuclear must be to commit upfront
to the funding necessary to secure the disposal option.  Neither
the nuclear industry nor the federal government has chosen to
face up to this.  Until a disposal option is identified and
accepted, we will always be at a standstill.

     What about the concern for future generations if we leave
this nuclear waste behind?  This is a serious argument.  But
again a choice.  Nuclear waste stored in deep salt mines versus a
world in conflict over diminishing fossil fuels.  Once more I
choose the former.  Not because it's easy but because the
consequences of the latter are all too knowable.

     The research community must also be funded to develop
non-fission alternatives.  There are compelling reasons to push
aggressively for fusion options (or others not now known) that
may be much safer and more inexhaustible.  We are talking about
an availability that stretches well into the 21st century.  But
that is when its need will be most critical.  This must be a kind
of mini-Manhattan Project of the future.  A nuclear source that
can never turn into a Chernobyl.  A nuclear source that can light
the darkness for those who come generations later without the
dilemma of waste disposal.  This is the necessary technology for
us to develop in order to secure our safety and our descendants'
safety.

     Finally, it should be noted that there are other serious
economic consequences of the United States losing its
technological edge in nuclear power.  If we let our capability
wither, as we are now doing, sooner or later there will not be an
American company able to build a nuclear power plant.  All of the
know-how will be Japanese or French or whatever.  And when the
world recognizes the need for non-fossil fuel base-load
generation and turns to nuclear we will again have lost our
competitive position.  The trade implications of this are
obvious.  But it also means loss of U.S. influence on issues such
as safety design and waste disposal.  The role of the federal
government is critical here because only it can take the steps
necessary to coordinate the emergence of the new nuclear power
option.  The President and Congress must jointly agree as to the
necessity for this option and then provide the leadership to work
with industry to make it happen.  This will involve issues such
as funding, regulation and site selection.

Fossil Fuels

     People who don't like to contemplate the nuclear option will
want to take refuge in the notion that we can always go back to
finding more fossil fuels.

     People who dismiss conservation and renewables will do the
same.

     Let's go out and extract more oil and gas.  This is, in
essence, the current policy.

     The scarcity of oil reserves contrasts with the more
plentiful reserves of gas in North America so the two are not to
be seen as identical.  But the prime weakness here is the obvious
- the more we find and extract, the less there will be.  We
obviously do need a vibrant oil and gas drilling and production
capability.  For the next few decades this capacity is absolutely
essential.

     But beyond the available U.S. oil reserves, particularly in
the Southwestern states, the options are less attractive.

     Take the Arctic Wildlife Refuge.  There are two possible
approaches.  First, go in, exploit it and secure the several
months at most supply said to possibly exist there.  Whatever
environmental damage occurs, that is just the price that has to
be paid.

     Second, keep the oil in the ground, preserve the environment
and treat that oil (if it exists) as available to future
generations whose need will be much more acute than ours. 
Obviously, the first approach offers greater current political
advantage.  The second, however, offers greater fulfillment to
the generational responsibility.  Guess which one George Bush
chose?

     But the second also offers strategic value as well.  As we
face future crisis after future crisis occasioned by our
dependence upon foreign oil, are we not better positioned if we
have put into place alternatives and conservation and have the
maximum amount of fossil fuels still in the ground?  Put another
way, does not a Drain America First approach maximize our
vulnerability?

     But beyond these arguments, the Bush proposal to open up the
Arctic Wildlife Refuge bespeaks of how much our oil addiction has
diminished all our other values.  Alaska is not just another
place.  It is the most beautiful and most preserved land on
earth.  It is, by far, the grandest gesture we have made in
deference to God's wondrous creation.  To seek to put the
wildlife refuge at risk while balking at a gasoline tax to
achieve the same net result is hypocrisy in the extreme for
someone who talked about wanting to be the environmental
president.  The Democrats in 1992 should commit to veto any
effort to despoil this part of Alaska as a substitute for an
inevitable energy policy.  In many respects, this issue is a
"defining moment" for our values as keepers of the land,
protectors of nature's wildlife and guardians of the energy needs
of our descendants.

     But even in the lower forty-eight states, the concern is
where the fossil fuels will come from.  Once the relatively easy
oil and gas reserves are tapped you begin to get into some pretty
dicey alternatives.  Drilling a hole to extract oil is one thing. 
Crushing a mountain to extract oil shale is quite another. 
Drilling a hole to extract gas is one thing.  Mining arid regions
of the country for coal is quite another.

     This is not to argue against fossil fuel development.  That
will happen and should happen in the decades of transition. 
Indeed, the nation is looking to natural gas to step in and
substitute for oil in ways unexpected just a few years ago.

     This, combined with the development of ethanol, methanol and
other alternative fuels, offers real time hope of lessening our
Persian Gulf addiction.  However, the fact remains that the
conservation/renewables/nuclear options should be put at the head
of the energy line.  Only by doing that can we contemplate the
wonders of grandchildren and great grandchildren without the
burden of knowing we have sacrificed them for our own comfort and
convenience.


V.  Foreign Policy - Time to Heal Thyself

     Since the end of World War II the United States has held the
Soviet Union at bay.  The policy was called containment.  It was
a test of American resolve and determination that has extended
for more than four decades.

     Today we have witnessed the triumph of that policy.  By
containing communism, we allowed its inherent contradictions to
eventually cause its downfall.  Communism did not fall to
invading armies or to an onslaught of nuclear warheads.  Its
demise was the result of two internal phenomena.  First, the
sense of injustice which fueled Marxist-Leninism soon gave way to
police states wherever communism was dominant.  Freedom was the
first casualty of this "worker's paradise."  Anyone crossing
through Checkpoint Charlie into East Berlin could not avoid the
heavy sense of oppression that characterized all of Eastern
Europe.  Second, the allure of communism as a cureall for the
ills of capitalism came apart as more and more countries found
that communism equalled petty corruption, bureaucratic
inefficiency and economic stagnation.  A system based on the
theory of noble common interest faltered upon the reality that
human beings need incentives that relate to themselves and their
families.  There must be a causal relationship between hard work
and reward if there is to be hard work.  Communism as an economic
system destroyed that relationship.  The result was thus
inevitable.  This inevitability, however, required time to
manifest itself.  It was containment that bought that time.

     The price paid by America (and its allies to a much lesser
extent) was enormous.  Thousands of lives were given to protect
freedom and trillions of dollars were expended as well.  But the
wisdom of Harry Truman has been borne out by history.  Contain
communism.  Believe in the fundamental superiority of democracy
and the free enterprise system.  Hold fast and eventually
people's yearning to be free and to provide their families with a
decent standard of living will prevail.  He was right.  It took
an awfully long time but it was accomplished without one nuclear
warhead being fired in anger.

     The collapse of the Berlin Wall brought the Cold War to an
end.  It will take a decade to mop up the remains but they will
be mopped up.  There will undoubtedly be setbacks as the Soviet
Union suffers through the terrible throes of transition.  Even if
there were to be a new rightist regime in Moscow, it would be
unlike the Soviet Union of the past forty-five years.  The reason
is quite simple.  The Warsaw Pact is gone forever.

     The fearsome armies of East Germany are now but memories as
the Germanys have united in an emotional embrace that has turned
the faces of the East Germans toward the West.  Elsewhere
throughout the Warsaw Pact, playwrights and union leaders have
become heads of state and freedom is savored as only it can be
tasted by the formerly enslaved.

     Within the Soviet Union as well the question is not one of a
possible Warsaw Pact army moving westward across Europe.  The
question is whether various republics will remain as part of the
Soviet Union.  And the answer is almost assuredly not.  There
will be new nations based on old identities.   Lithuania, Estonia
and Latvia are but the beginning of a long debate over what
constitutes a viable national state that can endure.

     And, finally, even within core Russia, the forces of freedom
and self-expression have been loosened.  Each day adds to the
deeper rooting of expectations.  The traditions of parliamentary
debate, of open citizen criticism, of religious observance, of
free market experimentation are all quite fragile.  But they now
exist in the minds of the Soviet people reinforced by images of
the rampant freedom being experienced by their fellow citizens in
Eastern Europe.

     This is the joy of a great emancipation.  But this is the
honeymoon.  More difficult days will follow as the harsh
realities of transition set in.  This is not a transition to be
marked in months or years.  It will take decades.  And the long
road will provide endless opportunities for demagogues to stake
their claim to leadership.  The sheer amount of dashed
expectations will create mountains of bitterness and resentment
as the coming economic dislocations set in.

     Freedom is lovely.  But chaos is frightening.  And sooner or
later there will be those who will take advantage of the deep
instinctive fear of public disorder.  One must understand that
the alternative to Mikhail Gorbachev is not just Boris Yeltsin.^
It is the hardline military conservatives as well.  The 1990's
will see events in the Soviet Union (and Eastern Europe) which
will not be pretty.

     It is essential here to understand two fundamental points. 
First, a Soviet Union in transition will always pose a certain
danger to us but that danger is not the risk of advancing Warsaw
Pact armies preceding a carefully planned nuclear attack.  It is
the danger of an unstable leadership which happens to be well
armed.  It is the danger, not of miscalculation, but unbalanced
desperation. As long as nuclear weapons exist in such vast
numbers they cannot be allowed to drift from our consciousness.

     Second, it is in everyone's interest to make the Soviet
transition as smooth as possible.  The less the economic chaos,
the less will be the risk of political extremism.  The Western
nations must help demonstrate to the Soviet people that there is
a light at the end of the democratic tunnel.  Economic
deprivation makes freedom less relevant to a people.  We must
ensure that economic hope is not extinguished within the minds of
the Soviet citizenry.

     This means a coalition of North American, EEC and Pacific
Rim nations meeting at an economic summit with the Soviets (and
the East Europeans) and hammering out Marshall Plan II.  This
will be a Marshall Plan not to contain communism but to keep it
in its grave (the hard view) or to enable a long suffering people
to enjoy the fruits of freedom at long last (the benign view). 
Instead of arraying our forces of war against the East, let us
demonstrate the genius of democracy by unleashing the true
generosity inherent in free nations.  This generosity will
involve the usual forms of assistance but it must include as well
the transfer of knowledge.  The task here is to bring into being
the organizational infrastructure necessary for economic reforms
to succeed.  This is not just a matter of letters of credit or
food aid.  It is fundamentally a matter of providing skills and
experience and management.  These are human talents that can only
be transferred by other human beings.  It obviously involves the
deployment of various Western corporate and academic entities. 
But it also means Western experts such as retired business
executives and consultants on leave devoting themselves to the
great task of the 1990's and beyond - the full integration of the
former Warsaw Pact into the commonwealth of nations.   Such an
integration will also enable us to have a greater capability to
influence the outcome of the independence movements in the
republics.

     Finally, a thought about how we have been affected by our
relationship with this great Asian continental nation.  Both the
USSR and the United States spent the latter part of this century
preparing for war against each other.  This constant tension gave
us our worst risk of loss of civil liberties (McCarthyism), our
closest brush with annihilation (Cuban Missile Crisis) and our
most bitter foreign involvement (Vietnam).  All those are past. 
What is not is the economic price that both countries have paid. 
We are both like muscle bound weight lifters who now have little
use for all the accumulated intercontinental muscle.  The contest
now is not weight lifting but long distance running.  All around
are the smaller, quicker nations who devoted themselves to
business while we were both focused on confrontation.  As one
observer has noted "the Cold War is over and the Japanese won."

     Both the United States and the Soviet Union need to ramp
down their military machines to levels that provide true military
security without rendering them economically impotent.  There
will be a lot of sorting out as we seek to find the appropriate
level.  I would opt to reduce our troop commitments overseas and
retain the research and development capabilities.  There is no
military might in a nation impoverished by an inability to
compete in the global marketplace.  There is no sustainable
military might when the national economy is in decline.  This
must be the most significant underpinning of the New American
Mandate.  The Soviets face that reality now.  But we face it
also.

The New World Order

     Harken a new chapter of world peace and harmony?  Sadly not. 
But one must rejoice about the passing of the spectre of the
superpowers having at each other in a fit of nuclear
miscalculation.  We have been delivered from the immediate threat
of nuclear winter.

     This deliverance, however, has given center stage to other
destructive forces as we have now witnessed in the extreme.  They
are not the aftermath of the East-West confrontation.  They are
local; they are regional; they are linguistic; they are
religious; they are ethnic; they are economic; they are tribal.

     The world seems capable of offering up an endless array of
bloody incidents on virtually every continent.  The Persian Gulf
has our attention but it is only the latest crisis.  El Salvador,
Ghana, Rumania, Argentina, South Africa, China, Panama, Liberia,
Kuwait, India, East Timor, Haiti, Afghanistan, Philippines, on
and on.  A year from now there will be others.  The overlay of
East versus West, of conflict based on capitalism versus
Marxist-Leninism, is gone.  That context hid other determining
forces that are now free to roam at will across the landscape of
the lesser developed world.  Many of these countries are not
rooted in centuries of jurisprudence and democratic institutions. 
For some of them, their history as a country is measured only in
post World War II terms.  Many of the boundaries of these
countries were artificially determined by outsiders to
accommodate foreign agendas.  Often those boundaries cut across
natural groupings or put historically rival groupings in the same
nation.

     Creating a nation requires a great deal more than geography. 
There must be a sense of people, a sense of common history.  Many
of today's nations lack these essential attributes.  They are
square pegs trying to fit into round holes carved by others.  For
some, the future cannot hold as tribal or ethnic or religious
rivalries come roaring back from their bloody pasts.  Added to
this basic disequilibrium is the communications technology
available worldwide which has raised expectations concerning
freedom, standards of living, health care and the like.  Many of
these expectations will not be met.

     Thus, we have a world where possible mass annihilation by
nuclear warheads has given way to continuous individual and small
group death by machetes, AK-47's and tanks.

     What does the United States do in these situations?

The End of Pax Americana

     It is clear that we cannot intercede in every case where
clashes have broken out.  Most of these conflicts are going to
involve the loss of innocent life and the temptation is going to
be to go in and somehow make things all right.  That temptation
is a snare and must be resisted.  There is going to be a lot of
sorting out in the years ahead as groups go against groups in
countries where the institutional bonds are weaker than the bonds
of ethnicity or religion.  And often they are weaker than the
acute remembrance of past injustices.  Horrid affairs will take
place and we must try to contribute to their prevention as much
as possible.  But no American blood should be casually spilled
taking sides in the internal affairs of woeful nations.  Our good
offices, yes, but not our blood.  The threshold of American
involvement must be raised to a level consistent with clear
national interests that are embraced by the American people.

     A clear example of this is Lebanon.  In 1982 I stood on the
balcony of the American ambassador's residence in East Beirut and
watched Israeli planes bombing PLO positions in West Beirut.  The
night sky was illuminated with flares.  Nearby Christian gun
positions would occasionally fire in the direction of Moslem-held
West Beirut.  The scene below me was so different from anything I
had ever seen before that it required an effort to believe that
it was real and that people were dying in buildings I could
barely discern.  It was a scene out of Dante's inferno.

     The natural instinct was to somehow intervene to end the
bloodshed.  But when I met with leaders from the various factions
during my stay it was clear that ethnic and religious differences
combined with past horrors were beyond any rational arbitration. 
There were forces at play that were primal and they would not be
easily contained.  Not by us, not by any western nation.  Perhaps
not even by any nation.  Today, almost a decade later, there
still is not peace.

     A more difficult situation arises where borders are at
stake.  Herein there are other considerations that come into play
- considerations that speak to the essential concepts of national
sovereignty and non-aggression.  The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait is
such an example.  It had to be addressed.

     In most instances the United States will not have great
national interests at stake.  In some cases, such as the Persian
Gulf, the American dependence on imported oil raises the stakes
considerably. Our economic vital interests, caused by our almost
twenty year failure to bring about energy self-sufficiency, will
continue to make us vulnerable to whatever winds blow in that
part of the world.

     We cannot, however, allow ourselves to continually become
the policeman of the world sending our youth to areas of great
risk and pouring our national treasure into the fray.  There must
be a police force in future instances but we should only be part
of the contingent.  We must not be the whole contingent or even
the majority of the contingent.

     Efforts are going to have to be made to provide a United
Nations Security Force with real teeth.  This will not happen
overnight and there are years of negotiations ahead to make it a
reality.  But one thing is for sure.  America no longer can
afford the role it has assumed since the end of World War II. 
Pax Americana must give way to Heal Thyself.  This is not
isolationism.  It is participation in a new internationalism
truly based on the principle of collective security.  This
principle has been articulated for decades but remains in the
realm of rhetoric not reality.  The United States must cause it
to become the basis for a new Pax Mundi.  True collective
security means true collective burden sharing.  The effort in the
Persian Gulf is a step in that direction but the journey is by no
means complete.

     Other nations, especially those with great trade surpluses,
have enjoyed a free ride as we willingly take up causes around
the world.  American blood is shed and we spend billions upon
billions of dollars that should be spent at home to reinvigorate
our economically depleted nation.  We are seen as willing to
fight battles for everyone else and rarely insistent that other
nations truly participate up to their proportionate share.  The
attitude used to be that we would never really push other nations
on these kind of issues so long as they were strong allies in 
confronting the Soviets.  Those days are over.

     There is a new world order, but we don't truly act that way. 
We need our resources at home.  We have a Herculean task to
steady our economic ship of state and to get out from under our
crushing national debt.  This is the first priority and all the
other priorities come after it.  Indeed, if we don't attend to
our economic peril, we won't be in a position to be of help to
anyone.

     The time has come to confront our allies with tough choices. 
Either they have interests at stake here or they don't.  If they
do, then they must either participate fully or be prepared to see
those interests adversely affected.  This new order will come
hard to countries who have prospered under our military umbrella
and devoted their resources to build mighty economies.  For them,
the message must be that the party is over.

     We have suffered our Vietnam.  We have seen our Marines
killed in Beirut.  Our troops in Saudi Arabia are the majority
force that contained the madness of Saddam Hussein, while not one
Japanese or German life was at risk.  Yet Japan is the most
dependent upon Persian Gulf oil of all the industrialized nations
in the world.  They had enormous economic interests at stake. 
Yet the Japanese say that their constitution, unfortunately,
prevents their involvement.  The Germans sold all kinds of
weaponry to Iraq including those necessary for chemical warfare. 
They even sold goods to Iraq after the embargo had been imposed. 
Rather than participate with other Europeans, however, the Bonn
government chose to play the role of bystander.  The Germans say
that they want to devote their resources to reincorporating East
Germany.  We should say enough!  They have vital interests here. 
They cannot be allowed to obviate their clear responsibilities by
hesitantly providing contributory funds under duress.  They are
doing only what they have to in order to quell American public
outrage.

     There will not be a new world order until and unless other
major countries are prepared to invest the blood of their sons
and daughters and the wealth of their treasuries in the duties of
the peacekeeper.  Our actions must force this new world order. 
We must not delay it by pretending we have unlimited young
soldiers and unlimited resources to spend all over the world.

     There are three choices before us:
     1.  Allow military aggression across borders to go
unchecked.
     2.  Deploy American troops, alone if necessary, as each new
world trouble spot erupts.
     3.  Put into place the new world order of multi-national
peacekeeping where the United States is a major player but only
in reasonable proportion to its allies.

     Option #1 will lead to world chaos.  There is no viable
recourse for America that removes us from the responsibilities of
a great global nation.  Our military strength and our democratic
values are world resources.  The issue is not whether to be
involved but how to be involved.  To some Americans the
temptation is to embrace a kind of latter day isolationism.  But
it will never be.  We are the hub around which allied democratic
nations revolve.  That reality cannot be ignored.  Iraq could not
have been allowed to conquer Kuwait with impunity.

     Option #2 will bankrupt America and cause undue personal
grief to the families of our servicemen and women.  This is the
policy that our allies desperately wish us to continue.  They
must be made to understand that an economically crippled and
divided America serves no one's interest over the long term. 
Japan and Germany are not safer with an America in economic
receivership.  It is truly galling that these nations have
managed to secure the safety of their youth while their interests
were defended by American men and women.

     Option #3 must be the basis of our foreign policy.  Only Pax
Mundi can call upon American military resources in a manner
consistent with our prevailing national needs.  We are but five
percent of the world's population.  We are the greatest debtor
nation the world has ever known.  We suffered about 60% of the
coalition casualties in the Persian Gulf.  These are facts. 
Let's have a foreign policy that recognizes these facts and
establishes the new world order in practice as well as in theory. 
We may be the most important policeman in the international
police force and we can accept that.  But we should never allow
ourselves to become the latter day paid soldiers for nations who
feel no moral obligation to sacrifice their own citizens.

The Third World

     There is a pattern to our travails abroad.  When it comes to
dealing with a superpower we are reasonably comfortable that we
know our enemy.  The Russians have been more European than not in
their 20th century history and mannerisms.  We have a good sense
of how they think and what motivates them.

     The same is true with our NATO allies and the Warsaw Pact
nations.  East-West we know.  All of our decision makers were
groomed in the school of East-West relations.  It is where we
have the "touch" that allows policies to have some hope of
success.  By contrast virtually none of our leaders came of age
in the North-South context.  They then must rely on position
papers prepared by others unaided by their own personal "feel"
for such matters.

     The Third World is very different.  And we don't truly
understand it.  In Vietnam we imposed an East-West overlay on the
Third World.  It was assumed that ideological dynamics were the
same everywhere.  The domino theory drove our decisions there but
Vietnam fell and the predicted onrush of Communist triumphs
around the world never materialized.  What happened?  Who knows? 
No one ever felt it was important enough to hold Congressional
hearings on the reason why the conceptual centerpiece of our
rationale turned out to be in error.  The war was over and no one
had the stomach to try and figure out how the best and brightest
could not understand what was happening inside the minds of
friends and foe alike.  An unhappy chapter.  So much sacrifice. 
Let's put it behind us.  It was just too painful.

     We never tried to figure out what we didn't know.

     Many hotspots of the future will be in the Third World. 
These potential conflicts will arise most probably over resource
questions or attempts to "remedy" colonially-imposed, artificial
borders.  How can we deal with these as they come upon us?  The
resolution of these potential crises cannot be endless military
engagement.  There are just too many disputed borders, ethnic
rivalries and unbalanced heads of state.  These non-U.S.-Soviet
confrontations must be the business of the world community but
there is a limit to the capacity and willingness of countries to
be militarily involved.  These confrontations call for a new
commitment to the rule of law in conflict mediation.  Such
mediation should be by entities that are perceived to be as third
world in their composition as reasonably possible.

     This means the strengthening of existing multilateral
institutions.  It means the creation of new mechanisms with
sufficient muscle to enforce the principle of peaceful resolution
of disputes.  The old adage of speak softly and carry a big stick
remains relevant today.

     When territorial and/or resource disputes do arise, such
disputes should be forced into binding and timely international
arbitration.  The objective here is to create a moral and legal
process that is created by the entire world community and not by
the usual Western players alone.  If the dispute is not resolved
satisfactorily, the World Court should be given in reality what
it has only been given in theory throughout the Cold War era,
namely the power to adjudicate the remedy.

     Should a potential aggressor refuse to seek a remedy through
binding arbitration or the World Court, or ignore the ruling of
such bodies, then economic sanctions as the primary enforcement
tool should be implemented swiftly and completely.  And they
should be kept in place until shown to be inadequate.  The world
community has demonstrated that strict sanctions can be
implemented effectively, witness the global response to the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait.  Should sanctions fail the capability must
exist to exercise the military option under United Nations
auspices.

     Herein it is essential that any future military actions
clearly have the appearance and substance of United Nations
supervision.  This will require a great deal of rethinking
because the current United Nations peacekeeping structure would
not have been able to counter Saddam Hussein in time to prevent
his possible invasion of Saudi Arabia, let alone evict him from
Kuwait.  The world's nations are going to have to sit down and
decide how to give the United Nations effective military
capability consistent with the concept of national sovereignty. 
It will require extensive negotiations obviously.  But the world
will be better served if the Saddam Hussein wannabes of the
future have less room to miscalculate world reaction to
unacceptable endeavors.  And we in the West will be better served
if such military responses are not perceived by third world
peoples as Western actions against non-Westerners.

     Finally, it's urgent that we spend the time necessary to
understand how Third World  nations think.  They are not mini
copies of Western nations.  They are different peoples with
different cultures - cultures no less worthy of our respect and
understanding.  They all need to be thought of as separate and
sovereign.  If we can do this we can avoid some of the quagmires
that we have experienced in the past.

     The nations of the Third World have a vastly different
perspective than we do.  Some are consumed with fears and
resentments about the former colonial powers.  Some have an
inherent uneasiness with nations that are mostly white and
Western.  Many of them deal from feelings of insecurity and
non-acceptance.  They don't act as we in the West would expect
because their cultures and histories and institutions are not the
same as ours.  Fundamentally, many of them do not believe that we
respect them.  And, sadly, they are often correct.  We think that
human history and the Judeo-Christian tradition are the same
thing.  Perhaps we can see how offensive that is to the billions
of people who don't share that tradition.  The Persian Gulf war
has demonstrated this dilemma.  Saddam Hussein was able to tap
into reserves of sympathy in the Moslem world when the bombing of
Iraq occurred.  This despite the obvious lawlessness and
brutality of his invasion of Kuwait.  How could these people
support such a dictator who had savagely killed other Arab
people?  The answer lies not in rationality but in the perception
that this was Iraq versus the United States and a handful of
Western allies.  It is said that war is politics by other means. 
True.  Future military actions must carefully calibrate the long
term political implications of our strategic decision making.

     It is in the self-interest of the United States to encourage
our colleges and universities to focus more effort on the history
and mores of non-Western cultures.  We need to understand the
thinking of Islam.  We need to know the legacy of American
involvement with regimes in Latin America.  We need to be aware
of the many cultures that determine the thinking of Asian and
African nations just as thoroughly as they seek to understand the
West.

     We cannot presume that the rest of the world thinks that way
we do.  There are powerful factors at work that cause nations and
peoples to have particular lenses through which they view events
around them.

     While this may sound self-evident I can attest to how easy
it is not to see it.

     I vividly recall how much my perspective changed during my
two years as a Peace Corps Volunteer in Ethiopia.  I lived in a
town/village called Wolisso and taught in the local school.

     In the summer between school years I remained in Wolisso to
work on a building project.  For that period of time I was the
only Peace Corps Volunteer there.  I found myself beginning to
think like an Ethiopian for the first time.  I also found myself
looking at non-Ethiopians through Ethiopian eyes.

     Since Wolisso was on the road from the capital city of Addis
Ababa to the provincial capital of Jimma there was occasional
traffic through the town.  Often they came at dangerously high
speeds given the fact that the road was usually full of people,
including children, and various kinds of livestock.

     One day, while walking along the road towards the building
site, I had to jump off of the side of the road as a car
barrelled past.  The driver of the large car was an Ethiopian. 
My reaction and that of the Ethiopians near me was clear
irritation.  Another arrogant upper-class Ethiopian.  But it was
soon dismissed as how things unfortunately were.

     Just as we had returned to the road to continue on our way,
another car came at us at a similarly irresponsible speed. 
Again, we all had to jump into the shallow gully at the side of
the road.

     As the car sped by with the horn blaring we all noticed that
the driver was white - either an American or a European.  My
reaction was not merely irritation but anger.  Real anger.  I
wanted to chase after the culprit and pummel him.  The Ethiopians
responded even more strongly.  They began to shout to each other
about the cursed "ferengi" (foreigner).

     Both drivers had committed the same act.  Both had
jeopardized the same people.  But there the sameness ended. 
History and perception and culture and nationalism came into play
and caused the reaction of the Ethiopians to each miscreant to be
radically different.  Even I was rendering separate judgments.
In the year that followed, I became acutely aware of  this
dichotomy and had no difficulty in seeing it in other
circumstances.

     It serves no purpose to argue that all of this is illogical. 
Logic and politics are not the same thing.  And if we are going
to be players in the non-Western world, we'd better understand
the hearts and minds of its people.

     But recourse to isolationism is not possible.

     It is inevitable that we will be involved in other Third
World crises after Kuwait.  It is then imperative that such
involvements only occur based on a true understanding of the
political and cultural forces at play and not just an assessment
of military capabilities.

     The evolution to Pax Mundi is going to require a great deal
more knowledge than we now have.  We are always going to be a
major player on the world scene, perhaps the dominant player. 
With American lives at risk, we have the moral duty to know what
we are getting into.


VI.  The Culture of America: The Essential Need

     Much of what has been written herein deals with policies and
rationalities.  I have attempted to analyze issues as objectively
as possible and to put forth real world solutions.  The effort
has been to cast off excessive dogma and to confront what is
coldly before us.  For some, this paper should now end at Chapter
V.

     What follows will seem somewhat ephemeral compared to the
previous chapters.  It will deal in matters less concrete but, to
me, at least as relevant.  It is the realm that has been mostly
ignored just because it doesn't lend itself to hard data or
legislative initiatives or regulatory changes.

     But there is more to America's renewal than policies and
programs and realities.  There is also the wondrous matter of
human will.  And there is the wondrous matter of societal
cohesion.

     There is no rational explanation for excellence and
achievement if one depends only upon predictions based on
quantitative data.  Potential is not performance.  Capacity is
not output.  There is a much deeper dimension.  That dimension is
the will of particular human beings to excel.  It is their
unrelenting drive to reach beyond.  That dimension is also the
capacity of a people to act in united purpose and to achieve
greatness by reasons of their cohesion.

     Where do these characteristics come from?  Why do some
individuals and some peoples have them despite serious
shortcomings and others not have them despite every advantage? 
How do you foster them?  How do you extend them throughout a
society?  How do you cause a society to properly value them?  I
believe that the single greatest determinant of human will and
societal cohesion is the culture that embraces and sustains a
people.  Culture is what gives us lift and what, in its absence,
can render us pitiable.

     To be part of a culture is to be truly blessed.  It provides
a sense of lineage - a knowing that one is part of something that
reaches far into the past, a reassurance that one is part of a
continuum, a strength  that comes from bonding with one's
ancestors as well as with one's contemporaries.  One is never
alone because one is woven into a larger fabric with other people
and with shared values.

     Not to be part of a culture is a curse.  There is only the
present, only the temporal.  Values and morals are ad hoc, a
sorting out on a day-to-day basis.  There is no spiritual frame
of reference.  One floats through life in search of a sense of a
larger belonging that, if found, is merely grafted on, not
brought up from within.

     The great nations of history have many differences.  But
they have one commonality - strong, vibrant, inclusive cultures.

     So it is with any human grouping.  It is true for families,
providing its members with a capacity to begin to answer the
inevitable inquiry "Who am I?"

     The mere grouping of individuals does not, by itself, make a
family.  There must be a strong sense of mutual concern and a
common purpose.  Correspondingly, the mere grouping of multitudes
does not, by itself, make a nation.  There must be the glue that
holds these multitudes firmly in a common embrace.  There must be
a culture that speaks to the people.

     Occasionally individuals not blessed with a coherent culture
will rise above their circumstances and achieve greatness.

     Nations never do.

     A nation's fate is inescapably a function of the strength of
its culture.  History certainly shows us that.  Coherent binding
cultures create great nations for good or for ill.  Centrifugal
national cultures create dissolution and disarray, always for
ill.

     Why does history record great advances by a people in a
particular era and no advances by a different people in precisely
the same era?  Why do a people advance in one time period and
then seem to regress in another?

     The answer does not lie in factors like natural resources,
geography or political systems alone.

     Often, the difference is culture.

     Will, discipline, dedication, commitment, patriotism,
togetherness, caring, reaching out - these are the manifestations
of a culture.

     How one defines culture is, of course, an endless debate. 
For me, it involves the values that emerge in the person.  It
defines what constitutes a life of worth and what constitutes
one's obligations beyond self.  It involves the sense of being
part of a clearly defined society which readily accepts you and
whose mores you honor deeply.  It demands that we view our fellow
countrymen as brothers and sisters whose condition and fate is of
true importance to us.  It is the fusion of scores of different
ethnic lineages into a vibrant continental nation.  It is E
Pluribus Unum.  Not only in legal and constitutional terms but in
the truest sense of a people bonded together.

     The role of the New American Mandate is to strengthen our
commonality.  We have to mold our many diverse cultures here in
America into a more cohesive "national family" where the emphasis
is put on such intangibles as self-esteem, inclusion,  work
ethic, education, pride in quality products, commitment to
learning, caring for each other.  We have to talk about and
debate and ponder how we can reinforce the cohesiveness that
connects us to each other and reinforces our sense of attachment. 
We must understand the constant need to nurture community.  For
it is this community which allows us to share goals.  And it
enables us to sense collective danger and to respond to that
danger as a whole people.  To compete with societies with strong
cultures requires an equally strong culture.  It's that simple. 
This is not commonality for the sake of commonality.  It's
knowing that while commonality is critical in creating a noble
society, it is, more importantly, the sine qua non of having a
viable economic future.  It is the necessary prerequisite.

     There are many parts to this discussion.  What follows are
examples of an attitude.  The fundamental point here, however, is
straightforward.  Our leaders, both public and private, must,
above all, commit to strengthening our national culture and to
make mighty the spiritual bonds that make us a people.

     A.  Minorities - Racial, Ethnic, Religious, Economic.

     Whose country is this anyway?  Whose history is it?  Are the
founding fathers the ancestors of all of us?  Or just some of us? 
When a young black child sees a picture of George Washington,
what are the feelings compared to when he sees a picture of
Martin Luther King?  Does a child of Greek immigrants feel more
connected to Thomas Paine or to Aristotle?  Do Cambodian refugees
from the killing fields feel true kinship with 18th century
Yankee farmers?  Does an American Jew at worship feel more linked
to the Puritans or to those who suffered in the Holocaust?  How
does a Mexican-American sort out his feelings about the Alamo? 
And do Native Americans really think that the history of America
began with Christopher Columbus?

     We are a diverse people.  Unlike many other countries, our
national history and most of our family histories do not
coincide.  Some Americans are descendants of those who crossed
the Bering land mass.  Others arrived yesterday by jet from
Bulgaria.  As we trace our national history most of us come to a
time when our families were not here.  They were part of the
history of another place.  So which history is relevant?  Both? 
Only one?  If only one, which one?

     The magical bond created by hundreds, even thousands, of
years of one people in one place is not available to us.  Our
history is much shorter.  Our family roots spread out all over
the world.  We must work resolutely at nurturing cultural
cohesiveness because it is not given to us in the same fashion
that it has been given to some others.

     The absence of such cohesiveness is alienation.

     Many of our people sense an otherness.  They sense that
there is an inner circle in America and they are not part of it.

     The problem is not statutory.  We have passed the
appropriate laws.  The obstacles are not institutional.  Most
companies and institutions actively seek diversity in the work
force.  The obstacles are less tangible.  They exist in the minds
of both the established and the disestablished.  It is very
powerful for something so subtle.

     The laws and the principles embodied in the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitution opened the gates to a glorious
land of equal opportunity.  But nirvana remains elusive.

     Equal opportunity, we have learned, is more than an open
gate.  It is the appropriate complement of skills and fundamental
self-esteem that makes the open gate meaningful.  To just open
the gate is to engage in cruel gesture no matter how innocently
it is done.

     The nation must address the non-statutory needs of our
fellow countrymen and countrywomen.  It's not just money.  It's
creating a culture of true inclusivity.  It's sending out the
message that we will go out of our way to make sure that skills
and self-esteem are part of the package.  Not just government
programs.  It's one-on-one, human being to human being,
volunteerism and private institutional outreach.

     Mentoring in the public schools as described earlier is an
example but it's more than that.  It is a way of thinking.  It's
white, male America truly pondering what its like to be a woman
or a person of color and trying to break through to acceptance. 
It's recognizing that the presumptions of equal opportunity taken
for granted by well-educated and affluent white males are not
possible for those who every day cannot rest in the assurance
that they are automatically esteemed.

     That esteem must be established.

     If it is not, we will always have a lesser society.  We will
also always have an underclass.  And it will be increasingly
alienated.  It will be an unending source of violence to itself
and to others.  And it will serve as a monstrously heavy burden
on our society as we seek to compete with societies free of such
inner turmoil.  Indeed, it will preclude any hope of competing
successfully.

     B.  Diversity - The Wonders and The Limits

     There is no more perfect American portrait than a schoolyard
of children of different racial and ethnic backgrounds.  It is
the vision, the inspiration of what America can be.  A diverse
America in harmony with itself is equipped to be the greatest
social and economic nation on this multicultural planet.

     The national discussion about diversity has included its
glorification and its damnation.  Some see it as a Godsend, some
see it as the devil's work.

     The challenge here is to understand that diversity gives us
composite strength, but that strength can only exist within a
commonality that holds us together.  I believe there are
unavoidable components to that commonality.

     First is language.  An America with scores of different
languages is truly rich in its texture.  In a multilingual world
such fluency is not only charming, it is also an enormous
advantage.  The appreciation of other languages, particularly
those spoken by significant numbers of immigrants in the locality 
should be part of the curriculum at the earliest grades in our
schools.

     All this, however, must rest upon one, and only one,
foundation - English.  As the language of the vast majority of
our citizens, as the language of assimilation for millions of our
immigrants, as the language of our government and commerce,
English is, and must remain, the core language of America.  Had
history been different there might have been a different language
that would have united us.  But our history is our history.  And
English is the only possible common tongue at this point of our
national life.  This is not to argue for the superiority of
English but for the reality of it.  Well-intentioned efforts to
provide pockets of other language existence is to doom those
pockets to be forever outside the commonality of America.  A
nation based on more than one language will always be inherently
in tension.  This is obviously true around the world where
language differences that coincide with ethnic or racial
differences are breeding grounds for never ending violence.  But
it is also true where language divides societies which seem on
the surface to be rock solid.  Witness today's non-violent but
separatist debate by the Province of Quebec in Canada.  It poses
great risk to an otherwise very cohesive nation.

     Children who do not speak English at home must be brought to
English proficiency as rapidly as possible.  Due respect should
be paid to their native tongue.  Efforts should be made to
provide adequate transition time.  But the message must be
unmistakable that in order to make American culture cohesive and
all-inclusive America must be English-speaking at its core.  We
want you to join us in that commonality and we will help you
achieve proficiency.

     Linguistic diversity is a strength.  A Tower of Babel is a
crippling weakness.  We must know where the former ends and the
latter begins.

     The second component of our commonality is education.  As
stated earlier, it has always been America's great equalizer. 
But this road to opportunity has not been uniformly embraced by
various groups.  Education is truly honored in some groups - from
the early Yankee settlers to the Jewish immigrants at the turn of
the century to today's Asian newcomers.  The pursuit of knowledge
and intellect was and is seen as the source of genuine esteem and
respect.  Many immigrant groups have had the same attitude in the
first and second generations and some seem to lose it
subsequently.  There is a latent anti-intellectualism in America
that seems to overcome this early appreciation of learning. 
Pride in being a top student sometimes gives way to fear of being
thought a bookworm - or even worse, a "geek."

     Here is where some serious soul searching must be done by
community leaders and the media. What are we honestly saying to
our young?  What values are we really conveying?  Does becoming
an educated person truly mean anything in the last analysis?

     The objective here involves the simple truth that the desire
to learn is fundamentally as critical as the opportunity to
learn.  Desire flows from children believing that learning
matters.  As a volunteer in the Peace Corps I taught students who
were desperately poor by our standards.  We used outdated or
inappropriate textbooks and the "facilities" were de minimus. 
The students were 9th and 10th graders almost all living away
from home and thus removed from the support of parents and
family.
     But they learned.  And learned very well despite every
conceivable disadvantage.  Because they wanted to.  Because they
valued it.  And because it was truly valued in their culture.

     No American classroom I ever entered was as resource poor as
my classrooms in Ethiopia.  But as I began to appreciate how the
will to be educated conquered all these obstacles, I would recall
the stories of Abraham Lincoln reading by candlelight.  I would
also remember how driven my father and his siblings were to learn
despite their immigrant backgrounds.

     These experiences left me a firm believer that society
creates learning by simply valuing it.  No amount of money, no
accumulation of technological equipment, can overcome a child's
sense that learning really doesn't matter that much.  We have
sent those signals and we have to change them.

     The conveying of values occurs every day.  The conveyors are
the leaders of America, the leaders of its subgroups and the
lords of the media.  Each must commit to sending a pro-learning,
pro-intellect, pro-education message.  How?  The best example in
my mind is Bill Cosby.  The Huxtable family, whatever the
criticisms of it, promotes a set of values with respect for
learning (and family) at the core.  It demonstrates how to retain
one's identity within a context that maximizes opportunity.  A
second example is Cosby himself.  He gave $20 million to Spelman
College, a powerful message of deep commitment to education - in
this case the education of blacks.  This is how people convey a
value system.  This is how learning is elevated to its rightful
and necessary status.  American philanthropists, foundations,
corporations, and everyday citizens would do well to see this as
a worthy road to travel.

     The same centrality of education must be promoted by the
local press.  A student who can throw an accurate forward pass is
certain in his mind that press adulation will follow.  A student
with very high scores in the SAT's never thinks that it will be
worthy of press coverage.  Yet, which is more important?  The
print media, radio and television should have education reporters
that systematically and regularly report on what is happening in
the classroom as well as what is happening on the athletic
fields.  Some are already moving in this direction.  It must
become a stampede.  

     The third component is equality of opportunity.

     In the great economic global competition, a nation's team
must be made up of all its diverse members.  As we face the
challenges of this global economy and as we face the challenges
of a threatened environment, every American contributes to our
response.  Positively or negatively.

     We will not become a world economic competitor using only
some of America.

     We will not become a society at peace with its natural
environment if whole sections of the population feel that they
have no stake in that society.

     By its sheer composition, America must be resolutely
inclusive.  Every person is part of the solution or, if not, will
be part of the problem.  Everyone will either be a rower or an
anchor.  We can have some effect on which they will be.

     The laws for the most part are in place.

     The task is the emotional acceptance, indeed, the emotional
embrace of the founding principle "All Men Are Created Equal."  
This basic belief has to empower people in all the modern forms. 
Those forms include race, sex, age and sexual preference.

     The battles of the past have been bitter.  We must put them
behind us and not tolerate the continued attempts to undermine
the progress we have made.

     This guarding against encroachments is a constant struggle
in the area of civil rights, women's rights and affirmative
action.  It's not just the laws but the messages those laws send
that are important.

     Human rights has to do with how we regard each other. 
Diminution of that regard lessens all of us.  And as a nation we
are made less viable if part of our human potential goes
unrealized.

     America is where "Be all you can be" was chosen as a slogan
for its armed forces.  For good reason.  Because in America more
than anywhere else, those five words are the cornerstone of what
we believe.

     The role of the President here is the constant and
unrelenting reaffirmation of that cornerstone.  We have to arrive
at the day when we truly look at each other as family.  Not just
because it would be nice.  But because the cohesiveness it will
provide will ensure our sustainability.

     C.  Giving

     'Tis more blessed to give than to receive. Now there's a
shopworn bromide if there ever was one.  Just the kind of homily
intended to lull the innocent into patterns of behavior that the
more worldly know to avoid.

     Except that it's true.  It is better to give.  Giving takes
time and it takes money.  But look at givers, and then look at
takers.  Who is really happier?

     Giving is Americana.  Thousands of colleges, hospitals,
museums and theaters exist because of the philanthropy of
individuals.  Tithing is an honored - and expected - part of some
religious traditions.

     Yet giving in America is very uneven.  Some people of wealth
recognize their responsibility back to society and are quite
generous.  Others feel no such responsibility and lavish upon
themselves and their friends every conceivable indulgence.  The
latter are hailed by the media which eagerly covers every last
gaudy detail.  The former will never have a program to compete
with "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous."

     So it is with corporate America.  Some companies are
extremely committed to being a good corporate neighbor.  They
recognize the need to give back to the community and seek to lend
personnel and financial resources to aid local and national
causes.  Other companies have a culture which, frankly, doesn't
give a damn about what's happening outside its office window or
factory gate.

     There is little to no public recognition of the good
corporate citizen.  There is absolutely no incentive, beyond
their own personal values, for company presidents and boards of
directors to engage in corporate giving.

     The President can change this.  There should be a Blue
Ribbon Committee of prominent individuals created to establish
voluntary guidelines for corporate giving.  Standards can be set. 
It has been done in Minneapolis.  Companies can choose to honor
them, ignore them, or something in between.  And every year a
list should be compiled as to who gave what, and that listing
should be made public.  Finally, the media should consider this
listing as important news and report on it extensively.

     Companies that care should be publicly acknowledged. 
Companies that don't should be open to scrutiny and criticism. 
The President should establish Presidential Medals for Corporate
and Individual Philanthropy.  The point here is to establish a
culture of giving, an embrace of giving, as an esteemed - and
expected - value for corporate America.  This notion, hopefully,
will then create an environment wherein Americans of all economic
means will find themselves more open to the same principle.  If
this were to happen the bonds between us all would be
strengthened.  Now, tell the truth.  If Donald Trump had endowed
chairs at Howard University instead of buying that yacht wouldn't
Howard be better off?  Wouldn't the country be better off?  And
truly, wouldn't Donald Trump be better off?

     Let's deglorify indulgence and return giving to the place it
enjoyed when great people made this country.

     D.  Culture as part of a Culture.

     Civilizations are measured by their art and cultural
achievements.  Sometimes it's architecture, sometimes it's music,
sometimes it's paintings and sometimes it's literature.

     These storehouses of human creativity and inspiration mark
the high water marks of what we are.  They are the places and
events which can uplift the soul - especially the soul of the
young.  How do you measure the impact on a young child of being
exposed to a performance of the Nutcracker Suite or the Messiah
in December?  Or the impact on an adolescent  being taken to a
matinee performance of "Les Miserables?"  Or a summers night
listening to a local orchestra perform?  Or a periodic visit to a
sculptor as she works on a piece of public art?  Or the chance to
see live theater instead of just another movie?

     We would all acknowledge these occurrences as valuable.  But
whose children have these experiences?  Generally it is the
children of the already educated or appreciative.  That's fine,
but the impact would be greater upon children of modest
circumstances who otherwise would not be so exposed.  These
children need a spiritual booster shot.  Some of them need it
desperately.  They need one spark, one glimmer to light the way
or to suggest a new direction.  This is where you change lives.

     In the absence of this, they will receive their values only
from the street and from the spiritual emptiness of television
programming.

     Investing in community cultural events is part of creating a
society that is intact and vibrant.  During budget crises,
government funds for the arts and humanities are always a
first-cut priority.  The reverse should be true.  During economic
crises the need is greater.

     The United States government must undertake to prioritize
funding of the arts and humanities, particularly for communities
outside the major urban centers.  The amounts here are de minimus
in the overall budgetary scheme of things.  It should be seen as
an investment in the personal horizons of its citizens,
particularly the young.  Not simply for the sake of supporting
cultural activities although that alone should be enough.  But
also in the understanding that we are competing with nations that
already value such activities.  Our increased embrace of them
will strengthen our people and help establish an increasingly
viable and functional American culture.

     E.  Spirituality.

     Separation of church and state is fundamental to freedom in
America.  This principle was adamantly proclaimed by the Founding
Fathers.

     They did not, however, dismiss spirituality.  Indeed, belief
in a higher order was part and parcel of the early Americans -
both the first Indian nations and the early European settlers.

     That spirituality is not unique to America, of course. 
There never was a great sustaining nation that was aspiritual. 
In our modern technological age with its impersonalness, the
search for larger purpose is no less felt.  That search for a
deeper meaning can exhibit itself in destructive ways, such as
drug and alcohol abuse, as well as other behavioral asymmetry. 
It need not be.

     The overt quest for spirituality has been seen politically
as a valuable electoral advantage by some on the right and a bit
too unsophisticated by some on the left.  Neither is appropriate. 
We all seek God in our own way.  We are all engaged in the search
for understanding of our place in the great order of things.  A
public acknowledgement of that search and a stated respect for
wherever that search may lead are not improper activities for the
political leadership of this nation.

     F.  The Land and the Buildings.

     The culture of a people is not separable from the physical
surroundings of that people.  We are of the earth.

     The preservation of the beauty of open spaces should be
pursued not only for the environmental reasons stated earlier, it
should be pursued for its capacity to renew the spirit and to
lend harmony to our culture.

     The same is true within the land that we occupy.  There is a
character to a place.  That character is defining.  Too often in
America the inhabited land all begins to look alike.  What is
unique about a locale is lost under the onslaught of sameness.

     A mall is a mall is a mall.  A commercial strip is a
commercial strip is a commercial strip.  A highway is a highway
is a highway.

     Care and attention should be paid to preserving the
character of the different parts of America.  The President is
uniquely positioned to encourage Americans to contemplate these
matters.  Although it is a predominately local matter, there are
federal roles such as historic preservation grants and UDAG-like
programs to keep urban centers viable.  Many of these cities are
already well on their way to implosion.  But beyond that, there
is the bully pulpit as Prince Charles has so aptly demonstrated
in Great Britain.  He cares about how his country resonates with
its surroundings.  Our leaders should do so as well.

     G.  Public Order.

     There is no way to talk about American culture in 1991
without addressing the issue of crime and public order.  There is
a darker side to the way we interact with each other.  Sadly, the
rise in crime in our country has been a constant theme for
decades.  This is especially true in our cities.

     It is impossible to achieve a viable American culture in the
midst of uncontrolled violence.  Citizens will simply not value
their membership in a society where they lack a sense of
reasonable physical security.  The fear of crime erodes the bond
between the citizen and the society.  Many of our inner cities
are cauldrons of acultural behavior.  Innocent people are unable
to escape the downdraft of this activity.

     How do we address this issue?  For years we have had a great
deal of law and order rhetoric from Richard Nixon's unleashing of
Spiro Agnew to the Willie Horton issue in 1988.  Congress has
passed tougher crime legislation and the death penalty has become
an all-too-common occurrence.

     But the goal of "safe streets" remains elusive.  We now have
a greater percentage of our citizenry behind bars than any nation
on earth.  That must be a sobering realization since it has not
significantly affected the citizenry's perception of physical
security.

     There are approaches to crime that deal with prevention. 
Obviously education, a sense of community, self-esteem - all
these are ingredients essential to minimizing the likelihood that
someone would engage in criminal behavior.  These matters have
been addressed earlier in this paper and are worthy of
reemphasis.

     There are other approaches that deal with punishment and the
certainty of that punishment.  These are equally important and,
as referenced above, the Congress has passed laws to accomplish
this.

     So what else can be done?

     There are two areas that I believe are left unaddressed. 
Neither is new.  Neither is easy.  The first involves getting
guns off our streets and the second involves recognizing that
wholesale drug trafficking should qualify for capital punishment.

     H.  Gun Control

     There is no greater hypocrisy than the prototypical
Republican position of tough on crime and easy on AK-47's.  The
rationale for this is pure politics.  Appeal to the millions who
worry about their safety but don't antagonize the National Rifle
Association.

     The availability of all kinds of weapons in America is no
accident.  The right to bear arms is seen by some as the only
absolute right granted by the constitution.  We have freedom of
speech but you can't yell "fire" in a movie theatre.  We have
freedom of the press but go too far and you'll be sued for libel.

     The two-facedness of the Republican posture is reflected in
the bizarre dilemma faced by many police, particularly urban
police.  Whom do you support?  The candidate who has the tougher
posture on crime but protects the rights of criminals to have
assault weapons?  Or the candidate who would ban assault weapons?

     I would suggest that our times requires a toughness in
dealing with crime, but combined with aggressive commitment to
get guns out of the hands of those who shouldn't have them.

     This extends beyond AK-47's.  The right to bear arms is not
a blanket purchase order for anyone to buy anything.  The ease of
killing with a gun stands in sharp contrast to the difficulty of
accomplishing the same end with a knife or other such weapon.

     Guns don't kill people.  People kill people.  True.  But
people without guns have a harder time doing it.  Guns should be
available for self-protection by those who choose to have them. 
They should not be available, however, for those whose motives
are injurious to social stability.  The Brady bill to finally
bring about effective gun control should be passed immediately. 
It is tragic that George Bush has chosen not to endorse it.

     A serious, non-ideological commitment to return to a
sustainable sense of public order is needed.  Too many Americans
perceive a kind of anarchy in the streets and that cannot be
tolerated.  These guns must be taken off the streets.

     I.  Capital Crimes Against Society.

     Crime in America today falls into two categories in my mind. 
The first is the level of crime inherent in any society.  There
will always be a criminal element and there will always be crimes
of passion.

     The second is crime that is drug-related.  And this is not a
level of criminal activity that should be acceptable.  It is a
threat to our very being.

     This threat does not result from guns or bombs or knives. 
This threat results from commerce.  It is entrepreneurial.  Yet
it kills.  It kills in massive numbers.  Some of the people it
kills die.  Others live but in a larger sense they die as well. 
This is not your every day one-on-one street crime.  Or your
crime of passion.  This is a methodical, planned, knowing
slaughter of the many in pursuit of money.  Massive amounts of
money.  And this slaughter is today the greatest threat to our
domestic common security.

     It is the threat of big-time drug dealing.

     How can we tolerate this dissipation of our collective
strength?  Drugs are overwhelming us.  No society ravaged by
drugs is going to compete with anybody.  Yet those who engage in
and profit from this trade are considered lesser criminals by the
criminal code.  I kill one person in a fit of passion and I am a
murderer.  I kill thousands of people by methodical drug
trafficking and I am not a murderer.  By what standard of logic? 
By what definition of true threat?

     Who truly kills the drug user found in an alley with a
needle in his arm?  Who truly kills the store owner murdered by a
drug user in search of quick money for a drug purchase?  Who
truly kills the intravenous drug user who contracts AIDS?  Who
truly kills the victim of an automobile crash caused by drug use? 
Who truly kills the newborn cocaine dependent baby?

     The major drug trafficker does.  Yet in states that impose
the death penalty he is immune.  I repeat.  By what definition of
real threat?  By what recognition of actual damage to our
societal core?

     If the death penalty is society's way of identifying the
greatest threat, it must look past the one-on-one crime of
passion or criminal intent.  It must concentrate on those who
would destroy all of us.  It must focus on the trafficker and,
once and for all, declare a war on drugs that is a war on drugs. 
Billions upon billions for defense against fading foreign threats
embodied by the Soviets and only hesitance in addressing the true
angels of death within our borders.  Unless drug dealing is
significantly reduced, we will never be a viable nation.  We will
never compete.  We will be dragged down by our fellow citizens
lost in the demonic caverns of drug dependence.

     J.  Conclusion.

     We will be what our culture empowers us to be.  To
strengthen our common culture must be our common mission. 
Recognition of, and dedication to, that mission is the mandate of
our leadership.  It doesn't lend itself to ten point programs and
quarterly reviews.  It will be a discussion that will never end. 
It should never end.  The journey to renew America's spiritual
base will take us back through our history to harvest the wisdom
of that history.

     We will revisit our ancestors' thinking and learn once again
to pay homage to the basic values that made America.  Those
values, long since articulated, will then serve as our safe
passage to the future.

     In our collective veins flows the blood of those who crossed
the Bering Land bridge.  Of those who endured deprivation during
the winter in Plymouth.  Of those who suffered in the holds of
slave ships and on the decks of immigrant ships.  Vietnamese boat
people.  Hungarian freedom fighters.  Salvadoran refugees.  On
and on.

     Above all, there flows the blood of those who died for
America.  For our freedom.  Not so we could be cynical, or
uncaring or second best.  But in the belief that we would be
worthy of their sacrifice in how we lived our lives and how we
honored our country.  This is the New American Mandate.


VII.  Return to Purpose

     Adversity tests the character of individuals.  It also tests
the character of a people.  We are now being challenged by
outside forces that seek to erode our standard of living and by
others that portend environmental and energy cataclysm.  In
addition, we are challenged by internal forces that are
undermining the fabric of our social order.

     What would our ancestors have done?  Simple.  They would
have accepted the challenges and pushed ahead secure in the
knowledge that their destiny was within their control.  Avoidance
was not what they were all about.

     So it must be with us.

     Facing our challenges forthrightly is how we honor the
labors of our forebears.  It is our moral imperative.

     But, more importantly, it is the source of our hope.  We are
a blessed America.  It is our will and determination that will
deliver us.  Let us, again, unleash the spirit of the American
people and again secure our future and the future of our
descendents.

     Let us return to purpose.

 WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     A week or two ago I stood before the Cathedral of Notre Dame
at Paris, enjoying one more both the superb skill of the builders
an the joyous cynicism with which they had mingled piety and
impiety in the sculpture. Paris always has surprises for me but the
most singular was that a French woman of mature years, apparently
normal intelligence, an fair education came to me and asked: "Can
you tell me, sir, what church this is?" I had just been explaining
to a friend how the large island in the Seine in which the
cathedral stands was once Paris; how half of it had been occupied
by the spacious palace and the soaring cathedral, and the citizens
had Just tucked their dark little homes into such odd corners as
God and the king did not require. Sixty years ago the French booted
their last monarch across the frontier, and now, it seem some of
them have so far forgotten religion that they have to ask
foreigners the name of a church for which America would probably
pay a billion dollars.

     Few countries have advanced as rapidly as France, which is one
of the least sentimental and most logical of nations, but we have
all advanced so far that one-half of our life is anachronistic to
the other half. The exemption of churches from taxation is one of
the worst anachronisms. It meant originally that the church was a
state within the state, having its own law and deciding itself when
and in what measure it might, in times of pressure; contribute to
the public treasury. When this arrogant claim was disallowed,
church property still evaded taxation on the ground that it served
a high public purpose, like, charitable or educational
institutions, which were then entirely voluntary, and it ought
therefore, to have at least this subsidy of an exemption from
taxation. There was no need in those days to inquire very closely
into the soundness of the public service. Practically the whole
community used the churches and, if a tax were imposed on them, the
community would have to pay it. The church was exempt on pretty
much the same grounds as the civic hall. It was like transferring
your money from one pocket to another. Now considerably less than
half the adults of any Community use the churches, and the last
argument for exempting them from taxation is quite discredited.
                                1

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

                     RICH AND EMPTY CHURCHES

     Church property in the United States is said to be worth about
four billion dollars, and it is increasing rapidly in value. Drive
round the fringes of any growing town or City and see how eligible
sites have been secured for the building of new churches; how old
sites that have risen ten or twenty fold in value are quietly sold;
how the clergy can hang on to city sites until the value is
colossal, while any other concern doing so little business would
have been driven out long ago by the fair incidence of taxation. In
the inner ring of large cities there are churches with fifty or a
hundred worshipers while business men pay appalling prices for the
land all around them. And the majority of us are supinely
protecting the business. Of the majority of church-users the great
bulk are women and children, and of the genuinely religious male
taxpayers the enormous majority live in the country or small towns.
We do not much miss the taxes on their Little Bethels. The
anachronism is that city property of immense value is used by only
about a tenth of the taxpayers of this city, yet the nine-tenths
lazily subsidize it by remitting taxation. Even business men seem
never to reflect that in remitting, say, a million dollars in
taxation on buildings which nine-tenths of them do not want they
are paying out of their own pockets a million dollars a year to the
people who do want them.

     Sometimes they tell us with an air of sweet reasonableness
that the churches are "doing good work" and that, after all, the
individual misses only a few dollars a year by agreeing to the
immunity. It is sheer mental laziness. If we taxed the churches,
and they then appealed to these non-churchgoers who appreciate
their good work to find the tax for them, probably none would
contribute a dollar. There would be a speedy revaluation of the
services of the churches. Take Paris. The total church-going
population is only about one-tenth of the entire community, and it
consists mainly of women and children. Now, no matter how much we
may admire the French woman, she is more rigorously excluded from
public life than woman is in any other advanced civilization. Yet
these men, nineteen of twenty of whom are not in the slightest
degree influenced by the churches, have, most particularly since
they ceased to go to church, purified the city of the last traces
of its ancient savagery. It is, proportionately, the law of the
world. There are two sets of men whom we would like to see
influenced, and we would not mind paying a few dollars for the
influence. They are the dishonest hypocrites and the honest
criminals. The churches flatly refuse to influence the first and
are quite incapable of touching the second class.

                    SWEEP OUT MENTAL RUBBISH

     Amongst my many eccentric and utopian ideas there is one that
calls for a sort of mental sanitary service in a modern city. I
loathe the idea of compulsory education after the age of twenty,
yet in some form we ought to have a public service that will sweep
and dust our minds periodically and provide a very large
incinerator for the rubbish. Even the most cleanly-minded of us
occasionally. discover that we have for years harbored a piece of
mental junk. There lies on my desk, as I am writing, a little work 


                         
                  
                                2

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

on the Stoics by that very distinguished Hellenist, well-known
skeptic, and most nimble-minded and charming of men, Prof. Gilbert
Murray, and I open it to see if I can find any nonsense. Here it is
at once. Murray likens the Stoic "God' to a "Friend behind
phenomena," and he Says that we all have a "yearning" for this and
an "almost ineradicable instinctive convietton" of its existence.
I doubt if one man in a hundred who got beyond what one might call
the convalescent stage after recovering from religion has the least
trace of such a yearning and conviction. Murray is no man in the
street but a very distinguished scholar of particularly alert mind
and acquaintance with men. One can imagine how easily less clear-
headed men will let these illusions accumulate in their minds,
especially in connection with religion.

     We cannot, of course, get my intellectual sanitary service,
and so those of us who feel impatient about it must do the sweating
and dusting as we can. And one of the best and most promising
opportunities ought to be a public discussion of the immunity of
the churches from taxation. How many of us -- I do hot mean by "us"
the militant and vigilant folk who read the Haldeman-Julius
Publications, but modern men generally -- genuinely regard the
black-coated gentleman we meet in the street as so valuable a
person that we will pay his taxes for him? Very few, surely. Some
of us, it is true, listen to the periodical Bolshevik scare and
persuade ourselves that all chance of making a million dollars will
disappear with the church steeples, but it is a poor fallacy. My
Bolshevik friends, and they are numerous, are the last persons in
the world to listen to sermons, and any stockbroker who sends a
hundred dollars to the nearest church with the idea that he is
protecting Wall Street ought to sit down and think a little. A
Preacher in Fifth Avenue, where the danger of the spread of
Bolshevism is not acute, can most eloquently vindicate our present
economic order. But a preacher in a district where the workers show
some inclination to listen to radicalism either does not open his
mouth or he proves that Jesus was the forerunner of Lenin.

                      PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

     We ask people only to use common sense. The churches are today
private institutions in which certain people say prayers and sing
hymns and listen to dissertations on sin. It is a free country, and
even the Communist or the Fascist does not want to prevent them.
But why in the name of all that is wonderful should the rest of us
pay them some $200,000,000 a year for doing it? A moderate tax on
church property would raise that, so we are meantime funding it
ourselves. You may suggest that it is not very onerous for us
individually, but that is not the issue. The burden we bear is a
just charge of intellectual laziness, of docility to usurpers, of
a confusion of thought which, if we generally tolerated it, would
wreck our homes or businesses in six months. We smile at the ladies
who put on an extra foot of frock because some hidden mandarins of
fashion say that this is now "the thing." Most of us men are just
as bad. If it is the fashion to exempt churches from taxation we
acquiesce without even inquiring what the real motives or who the
real dictators are.

 


                         
                  
                                3

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     To many of us, of course, a rigorous campaign for the taxation
of church property would mean immeasurably more than a financial
readjustment, just as the present immunity of the churches means to
them immeasurably more than the two hundred million dollars at
which the product of a tax is estimated. The immunity means that
they have state-sanction, which is supposed to be the sanction of
everybody except a few cranks, for their profession of rendering
valuable services. A very long stride will be taken in the
direction of rationalizing the country when we remove this public
endorsement of the claims of the churches. I do not suggest that
there will be a serious diminution of worshipers in a chapel when
they are told from the pulpit that in future they have to find a
new fund of a thousand dollars or so, but we shall meet them on
more equal terms, as one body of citizens differing from another.
The chief thing that prevents me from lapsing into that comfortable
mental sleepiness to which a man of my age is entitled, is the
stimulation of fighting the prosperity of humbugs, the way in which
the clergy and the aristocracy and all sorts of people with
improper privileges seem to smile at me. I dream occasionally, as
I smoke my last four pipes at night, of forming a League of Youths,
a Thundering Legion of young folk who will go out into the streets
with me looking for lies to scotch, for usurpers to dethrone, for
hypocrites to unmask, for injustices to set right...

                     MAKE THIS A REAL FIGHT

     Dreams, of course, I am always dreaming. But it seems that my
energetic friend and colleague Haldeman-Julius is going to do
something of the kind and to begin with this valuable campaign to
rouse the nation to some sense of this absurd and anachronistic
immunity of church property. Let me urge those many readers whom I
have found in America not merely to support him but to make it a
real and live campaign. Never mind the size and wealth of the
churches, Never mind, the contrast between the forty million
perfectly drilled and organized and doped churchgoers and the sad
disorganization and scattering of the eighty million non-
churchgoers. Talk about it. Make people read about it. Teach people
the joy of fighting, of being a personality, of raising one's head
above the stream. It is as good an issue as any to start with, and
sooner or later the start has to be made. Get young folk to blot
out of their Birthday Books that pernicious maxim: Great is Truth
and it will prevail, Great is the average man -- if you can
persuade him to make a great nuisance of himself. A reader of my
Little Blue Books wrote to tell me how he propped one against the
cruet at his lunch-shop day after day, and how religious folk who
recognize those mischievous little explosives at twenty yards'
distance got the manager to ask him to go to some place of which I
forget the name. That's the spirit. My milkman asked my housekeeper
the other day on what subject I am writing at present. "On God,"
she said, "and he guesses he'll knock him off his perch." The good
news spread in the dairy world. The girl at the circulating library
...

     In short, quite ordinary folk can, if they just know when to
be quiet and when to be noisy, when to be Polite and when to curse,
but to keep on doing whichever is advisable, help the world along.
The work depends more and more on such folk. Societies and leagues 


                         
                  
                                4

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

and associations either prosper and fatally degenerate, like some
on Which I have wasted decades, or reach too small a number. I
suggest that readers of the Haldeman-Julius Publications try the
experiment of making this a live campaign. Do not expect to convert
Mr. Hoover in the first month. That is not the Point. The idea is
that here is a chance of rousing great numbers of people to a sense
of one foolish anachronism that we tolerate in connection with
religion, and it will reverberate in the mind and make people
perceive a dozen others. Get out the figures, if you can, for your
own town. Look up the churches with hundred-thousand-dollar sites
and a hundred worshippers. let the press know that there are live
men and women reading it as well as Rip Van Winkles. Make editors
realize that in the majority of towns today the majority of readers
do not go to church and do not really care a cent about the work of
the churches. it might load to the disappearance of those Saturday
and Sunday features that linger from the days when America was a
Christian country, to a bolder note about encroachments on our
liberties, to real news about the thought-currents of the modern
world. Editors know quite well that the bulk of people are not
seriously interested today in church work, at least in any town
that is more than a mile in diameter, but they have to listen to
the noisy folk. Let them have a noise. Blessed are the peace-makers
for of such is the kingdom of heaven. Let them have it. Say rather:
Blessed are the fight-makers, for they shall possess the earth.

                      A CAMPAIGN OF SANITY

     Seriously, a lively, rousing, country-wide discussion, the
sort of discussion that makes the editor of a daily call for a
symposium and the editor of a weekly or monthly wire off for the
opinion on the matter of Babe Ruth, Clara Bow, and Calvin Coolidge,
would be a good opening for a new campaign on behalf of sanity. The
pretext that we want to tax the house of God is hardly like to be
raised. It might provoke the Catholic to tell the Protestant, and
vice versa, what precisely he thinks of his preposterous claim that
God is in his church. The only argument that can plausibly be
raised against taxation is that the Churches do so much good that
civilization depends upon their exertions. Have Your machine-guns
ready for that. It is just the sort of plea we should like them to
set up. A good broadside of facts from history and about the
relation of modern progress and decay of religion, would open the
eyes of large bodies of readers whom we cannot ordinarily lure into
reading truthful statements. I wish I were in it, but a mere
foreigner could be bluffed into silence -- especially such a small
and modest foreigner -- and here in England the organizations that
ought to start a fight have dwindled into mutual admiration
societies and refuges for homeless mystics.

     Many will, no doubt, have recourse to the plausible cry that
we are stirring up sectarian strife. Do they mean that only
political strife is to be permitted in a prosperous community? Or
do they mean that dervishes shall be encouraged to roam the country
with frantic denunciations of science, and professors encouraged to
encourage them by prostituting their learning, and the rest of us
hold our tongues? Or do they mean that the only subject on which
people cannot behave themselves when they begin to dispute about it
is religion? We people who seriously hold that religion has nothing


                         
                  
                                5

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

to do with the progress or maintenance of civilization are very
numerous today. But no one talked of sectarian bitterness and civic
strife when, quite recently, we were, apropos of the imaginary
atrocities in Russia, denounced violently from Boston to San
Francisco. Certainly we should smile if anybody suggests that we
must not mention a tax on churches for fear of stirring up
sectarian strife. On the contrary, we should see such sectarian
amity as has never before been seen on this planet. We should
probably see the Archbishop of Baltimore arm in arm with the
Fundamentalist leader, Bishop Manning linked with Aimee, leading a
great procession along Michigan Boulevard, and calling for the
lightning of the Lord upon these ruffianly people who want to make
them pay their own taxes.

     That is all that it amounts to. That particular ten million
dollars that the churches of the city would yield if they were
taxed is paid at present by the citizens, most of whom profit
neither directly nor indirectly in the work of the churches. The
threat might even drive them into making themselves useful. They
might cease to talk for a time about our wills and have a look at
our crimes. They might discover that it is not entirely
inconsistent with the principles of the Christian Church that its
ministers should unite to rid a city of its gunmen and dishonest
officials instead of talking picturesquely about them in the
pulpit. I see an endless prospect of good results. ... But I see
most clearly of all that this is a transparently just and sound
plea, one that could unite millions of men and women, one that can
enlist the sympathies of practical people, yet one that would be an
excellent beginning of teaching a nation to think seriously on the
new conditions of our age.

            OUR COMPLETE PROGRAM AGAINST CLERICALISM

     1. We demand the taxation of ALL Church property.

     2. We demand that church lobbying be resisted by free men as
one of the major evils that threaten the principles of secular
freedom, human rights and realistic Progress in government.

     3. We demand that the Bible be kept out of the public schools
and that the public schools shall not join in any scheme of
religious propaganda.

     4. We demand the complete rejection of the principle of
Christian morality -- religious dogma and doctrine -- in the making
of our laws, with special reference to the religiously inspired
intolerance of our laws concerning sex and censorship.

     5. We demand the repeal of all anti-evolution laws and the
vigilant prevention of all attempts by clericalism to dictate, even
though under the treacherous guise of "democracy," the course of
teaching in our state schools and universities.

     6. We demand the repeal of blue Sunday laws, and the absolute
rejection by government of the dogma that this day is sacred or
that it is to be dominated by preachers and pious zealots.



                         
                  
                                6

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     7. We demand the repeal of all blasphemy laws and all laws
prohibiting Atheists from testifying in court or from holding
public office.

     8. We demand that government shall cease the employment of
chaplains in the national congress, in the state legislature. and
in state institutions.

     9. We demand that government shall strictly refuse financial
aid to sectarian, religious institutions -- whether schools,
hospitals or whatnot -- and that religion, in all its enterprises,
shall pay its own way.

     10. We demand the ending of all favoritism to religion or
recognition of religion by government -- that is, we demand the
complete secularization of government both in form and function.

                          ****     ****

                   A PREACHER ADVOCATES CHURCH
                            TAXATION

                     THE Rev. L.M. Birkhead

    (Minister, All Souls' Unitarian Church, Kansas City, mo.)

     One of the most amazing and paradoxical of modern Political
situations is that of the United States committed fundamentally to
the absolute divorce of church and state, and yet contributing
indirectly, by means of the exemption of church property from
taxation, more than $250,000,000 annually to the support of the
church.

     Theoretically in America we maintain that the aim of taxation
is "to secure the equal distribution of the burden of civil
society." Theoretically we maintain that our government is founded
on the principle of the separation of church and state. The
fundamental law of the land states explicitly that "Congress shall
make no laws respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof." But it is pure hypocrisy to
maintain that we carry out these principles in practice. The
exemption of church property from taxation is a plain denial of
these principles.

     And Incidentally we might mention many other evidences of a
too close connection between Christianity and government in
America, as, for instance, the employment of chaplains in
legislative bodies, in the army, and in other government
institutions, the appropriation of public money for charitable and
educational institutions of a sectarian character, the compulsory
reading of the Christian Bible in the public schools of a number of
states, the appointment of religious festivals and holidays by the
President of the United States and governors of the various states,
laws compelling the keeping of Sunday as the Sabbath, and many
other such regulations.




                         
                  
                                7

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     It is claimed for the church that it ought to be exempt from
taxation because of the, valuable social service which it renders
to human suffering. It is well just to keep in mind two facts:
first, that very few churches are actually engaged in ministering
to the poor (other agencies render such services much more
efficiently), and, second, that the churches so engaged never do so
from the highest motives; they are always thinking of winning
supporters and members.

     But granting that the church is a useful institution, " if you
were to exempt that which is useful," to quote the wisdom of
Ingersoll, "You would exempt every trade and every profession." Or,
to use the words of James F. Morton, Jr., In his recent book
'Exempting the Churches,' "Our great philanthropists, scientists,
inventors, and educators are not exempt from taxation on the ground
of the great good they are doing."

     The church contributes services to the state as a police power
more valuable than the mere pittance it might pay on its tax exempt
property, the friends of religion claim. But does it? I ask this
question in all sincerity. It may be there was a time when people
could be frightened into being good by the fear of hell. It may be
that Voltaire was right in his day when he said that he didn't
believe in hell, but he wanted his servants to believe in It. But
that time is gone, for hell has been abolished and the church has
lost its power (if it ever possessed it) to keep "bad people" in
order. It is illuminating in this connection to read the statistics
with respect to the religion of criminals confined in our
penitentiaries.

     To tax church property would put many churches out of
existence, the defenders of the exemption of church property say.
If an organization cannot pay its way, if it hasn't members and
friends who believe in it sufficiently to support it, why should
those of us who do not believe in it at all, who believe, in fact,
that it is a vicious, superstitious institution, be compelled to
support it?

     We all agree that there may be some excuse for exempting
schools, orphanages, and hospitals from taxation, for they are
performing functions the state would be obliged to perform. But
religion is another matter -- a very personal and private matter
which is no affair of the state.

     It cannot be said too frequently to the American people that
religion is a strictly private affair, and that it is never the
duty of the state to interest itself in either the life or death of
the church. The church is not a public institution in the sense
that it performs any duties which the state would have to perform
in the absence of the church,

     To tax church property is "robbery of God," we are told by the
defenders of the faith. But which God? The Methodist, Baptist,
Catholic, or Jewish, Fundamentalist, or Modernist?





                         
                  
                                8

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     Since the churches are subsidized by the whole community -- by
means of tax exemption -- one would suppose that they would be 
community institutions. But such is not the case -- they are very
exclusive and are quick to deny their privileges to the public
except upon very exacting conditions.

     It is rather illuminating to note that, though all of the
states of the Union exempt church property. from taxation, there is
expressed in the legislation (pertaining to this matter of church
property) in many states a suspicion that religions institutions
might speculate in land or might use their buildings and property
for profit in the name of religion.

     in many states, limitations are placed upon the amount of
church property which can be exempted from taxation. In some
states, churches are limited to one acre (on which exemption can be
claimed) within the city, and to five acres a mile or more from the
city,

     In the state of New Hampshire, the amount of church property
exempt from taxation is limited to $150,000. In Iowa, church land
is exempt up to, but not exceeding, 160 acres; in North Dakota, the
limit is one acre. In Missouri, the exemption is restricted to one
acre within the municipality or within one mile of the
municipality, and to five acres if one or more miles from the
municipality. In Kansas, exemption applies only to buildings used
exclusively for religious purposes and "grounds not to exceed 10
acres." Montana places the exemption of church property on the
following basis: "Such property as is used exclusively as places of
actual religious worship, but no more than is necessary for such
purposes."

     The state of Washington exempts all churches, built and
supported by donations, whose seats are free, and ground not
exceeding 120 feet by 200 feet, together with parsonage. and "the
area of unoccupied ground exempted in connection with both church
and parsonage shall not exceed 120 feet by 120 feet and the grounds
are to be used wholly for religious purposes."

     Some of the states place no limit on the property exempted if
the property is used exclusively for religious purposes. The
statutes in such states read; "all buildings and grounds, when used
solely and exclusively for religious purposes," or "when not used
for profit," or "when not held by way of investment."

     It would be interesting to investigate the enforcement of
these statutes, to discover, if possible, how law-abiding church
organizations (so loud in their defense of the 18th Amendment and
the Volstead Act) really are. I dare say that it would be very easy
to find many instances of religious organizations exceeding the
limit of church property exempt or evading taxes on property used
for other than religious purposes,

     What one of our leading weekly magazines called "saintly
profiteering" is quite common among religious organizations. Look
at New York City, for instance, where more than $500,000,000 worth
of church property is exempt from taxation! The Madison Avenue 


                         
                  
                                9

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

Methodist Episcopal Church of New York City recently made $650,000
profit by selling its church property for an apartment house site.
A Jewish synagogue, Temple Emanu.El, made $1,000,000 clear from the
sale of its property a few years ago. St. Patrick's Cathedral, New
York City, is said to be located on property worth $10,000,000. The
fabulous wealth of Trinity Church, located at the head of Wall
Street, is familiar to everyone. But New York is not the only city
where such conditions prevail, though its case is extreme. There
is, for instance, the case of a great midwestern religious
organization which recently won from the Federal government the
right to have its income exempt from taxation -- and the income
involved in this contest with the government amounted to several
million dollars. I refer to the Unity society of Practical
Christianity with International headquarters in Kansas City, Mo.

     A commission on taxation reported to Governor Pinchot of
Pennsylvania a few years ago that in the city of Philadelphia,
14.77 percent of the total property was exempt from taxation, and
of this 14.25: percent consisted of churches, parochial schools,
and buildings for teachers of parochial schools. The commission
reported that it was convinced that this condition constitutes a
subtle and dangerous form of securing a state subsidy for religious
institutions. "However commendable the purposes of these
institutions may be," the committee recorded, "it is nevertheless
a fact that the rapid increase in welfare facilities and the
generous donations to welfare work are gradually creating a non-
taxed class of property which is increasing more rapidly than the
wealth of the community, thereby forcing additional tax burdens
upon the taxable wealth to an unfair degree."

     The commission recommended, therefore, that religious and
charitable institutions be required to pay taxes on their land
values, leaving improvements exempt.

     Very few of our political leaders have ever had the courage to
speak out on this matter of taxing church property. Be it said to
the glory of General Ulysses S. Grant that while he was President
he gave expression to prophetic wisdom in the following words
contained in a message to Congress (in 1875):

          I would call your attention to the importance of
     correcting an evil, that if permitted to continue, will
     probably lead to great trouble in our land before the close of
     the nineteenth century. It is the acquisition of vast amounts
     of untaxed church property. In 1850, I believe, the church
     property of the United states which paid no taxes, municipal
     or state, amounted to $87,000,000. in 1860 the amount had
     doubled. In 1870 it was $354,483,587. BY 1900, without a
     check, it is safe to say, this property will reach a sum
     exceeding $3,000,000,000. So vast a sum, receiving all the
     protection and benefits of a government, without bearing its
     proportion of the burdens and expenses of the same, will not
     be looked upon acquiescently by those who have to pay the
     taxes. In a growing country, where real estate enhances so
     rapidly with time, as in the United States, there is scarcely
     a limit to the wealth that may be acquired by Corporations,
     religious or otherwise, If allowed to retain real estate 


                         
                  
                               10

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     without taxation. The contemplation of so vast a property as
     here alluded to, without taxation, may lead to sequestration.
     without constitutional authority, and through blood. I would
     suggest the taxation of all property equally.

     It would be almost impossible to get any sort of a political,
intellectual or social leader of today to speak with such boldness
concerning the church and its failings.

     "One of the clearest and most audacious of the few recent
utterances on the taxation of church property has been made by
Professor Harry Elmor Barnes in his 'The Twilight of Christianity.'
If he is not severely punished by the church for so forthright a
condemnation of the church, then I am no prophet. Barnes wrote:

          One aspect of the economics of religion is the economic
     waste connected with the maintenance of ecclesiastical
     edifices and their operation. One could conceive of a type of
     religion for which large expenditures would be economically
     justifiable on the ground that the churches were rendering a
     very valuable social, economic and ethical service to the
     community, but the activities of orthodox churches in America
     must be regarded as rather worse than useless.

          The hypothetical adjustment of man to an imaginary
     supernatural world and the salvation of mankind from a non-
     existent hell cannot be regarded as a service of any merit
     whatever. The churches may incidentally offer some relief to
     the poor, but it is a moot question as to whether, in the long
     run, this sort of charity is not socially disastrous.

          By 1926, the annual expenditures of religious
     organizations in America for salaries, repairs. payments on
     debts and benevolence were $814,370,000. To this sum should be
     added large donations to the cause of foreign missions. The
     writer of these lines is well known to be a person of pacifist
     leanings who earnestly deplores our present excessive
     expenditures for modern armaments, but it is certainly more
     justifiable to expend large sums of money to protect ourselves
     against potential earthly enemies, than to appropriate
     infinitely greater amounts to protect ourselves from wholly
     imaginary enemies in the postulated spirit world. We may be in
     no danger from Japan or Great Britain, but they certainly
     menace us more than the devil.

          In 1926, the value of church edifices was $3,842,500,000.
     These are free from taxation, though they benefit by all sorts
     of public expenditures such as fire protection, transportation
     facilities, police protection and the like. Probably no other
     step would be allowed with such definite practical
     consequences as the reasonable taxation of church property.

          In addition to the churches, we must consider the
     parochial schools which are maintained at great expense by the
     faithful, though in many cases parents can ill-afford to make
     the necessary contributions.



                         
                  
                               11

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

          The annual expenditures in America today for this purpose
     of adjusting Americans to supernatural powers certainly total
     far more than a billion dollars. One can scarcely refrain from
     remarking upon what might be done with this money if wisely
     and directly expended for the secular betterment of mankind,
     or even used to support modernized religious cults and
     organizations whose aims are chiefly related to social
     improvement and aesthetic appreciation.

     The present economic status of the American Church -- rightly
characterized as "a tax-dodging and tax-eating institution" --
defies the courage and sagacity of liberals. As liberals --
theists, atheists, agnostics, humanists -- we are contributing to
the support of religious institutions which are founded upon
superstition and whose influence is vicious. This is certainly a
violation of the fundamental human liberties and decencies. By no
sort of sophistry can we establish any significant difference
between appropriating money for a sect and relieving it of
taxation. The church at present is enjoying a form of legalized
graft, for it is in no sense rendering a service equal to the
benefits it enjoys under our liberal laws. The separation of church
and state is, so far, merely theoretical. The church is subsidized
to the extent of more than $250,000,000 annually by relief from
taxation. Its property has increased in value until today it totals
more than $6,000,000,000, though some conservative students put the
figure at $4 000,000,000.

     If the church hasn't the decency to come forward and confess
that it has been enjoying special privileges which it did not
deserve, and voluntarily give up these privileges, have we liberals
the courage to say that the church's abuses of our liberties must
cease? And have we the boldness and skill to put the church in its
proper place?

     This is one of the most challenging labors confronting
liberals today.

                          ****     ****

                 WHY CHURCHES ARE EXEMPTED FROM
                            TAXATION

          A WEIRD LIST OF THE "USEFUL PUBLIC SERVICES" 
            PERFORMED BY THE TEMPLES OF SUPERSTITION

     PRESBYTERIAN -- Exempted from taxation for "useful public
service" of teaching the doctrine that God in the mystic beginning
of things settled the destination of each human being, scheduling
some of them inevitably to heaven and most of them unescapably to
hell.

     METHODIST -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful public
service" of teaching that all men are sinners, that Jesus Christ
died to Save from sin all men who believe in the Said Christ, that
such believers are "made new creatures in Jesus Christ" and thus,
according to the rule that things which mean nothing are equal to
anything else, are "adopted as the children of God."


                         
                  
                               12

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     BAPTIST -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful public
service" of teaching that baptism by means of total ducking is the
only device by which men can keep out of hell.

     CAMPBELLITE (Disciples of Christ) -- Exempted from taxation
for the "useful public service" of teaching that "while both Old
and New Testaments are equally inspired, both are not equally
binding upon Christians;" that "the old was God's will with
reference to the Jews, the New is his will with reference to
Christians."

     JEWISH -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful public
service" of teaching that the Old Testament is the only part of the
Bible that is the authentic word of God, that the true Christ is
yet to come, and that Jews alone are "the chosen people" of God.

     CATHOLIC -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful public
service" of teaching that priests can grant confession and
absolution of sins, that the sacramental wine and wafers are
magically turned into the blood and flesh of Christ, and that the
Pope is the supreme official representative of God.

     LUTHERAN -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful public
service" of teaching that the miraculous Christ of the New
Testament explains all the problems of man -- "creation, man,
faith, the Word of God, the sacraments, prayer, the Church, the law
and the gospel, sin and grace."

     EPISCOPAL -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful public
service" of teaching that the Nicene Creed, formulated by the early
Christian fanatics centuries before the modern age of science and
culture, is "the sufficient statement of the Christian faith" and
an explanation of the sacred mystery of mystical hocus-pocus; and
that great "spiritual" value flows in a sly and imperceptible
manner from "the two sacraments -- baptism and the supper of the
Lord -- ministered with unfailing use of Christ's words of
institution and of the elements ordained by Him. ..."

     CHRISTIAN SCIENCE -- Exempted from taxation for the "useful
public service" of teaching that the material world is an illusion,
that mind (completely divorced from reality) is the only reality,
and that all minds are in mortal error that do not agree with the
extravagant effusions from the mind of old "Mother" Eddy.

     The other churches -- countless, disputatious, futile and
intellectually obscure -- perform "public services" that are
equally "useful." intelligent Men and women should ask themselves
whether the dissemination of these foolish rags and tags of ancient
theology is entitled to the special sanction, favoritism and
amazing tax exemption granted by the state.

                          ****     ****







                         
                  
                               13

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

                     THE CHURCH IS A BURDEN,
                  NOT A BENEFIT, IN SOCIAL LIFE
                               by
                       E. Haldeman-Julius

     I have no doubt that many persons -- a minority but a
zealously vociferous group -- would have so little feeling of humor
and anachronism as to claim that churches should be exempted from
taxation because they are "houses of God." It does seem that it
would be hard on a God, if any God there were, to learn a different
set of manners, beliefs and tricks in each of his denominational
"houses." But this "house of God" claim is not the reason generally
alleged for church tax exemption. The average man or woman, making
pretensions to intelligence and fairmindedness, would say that the
churches should be free from the obligation of taxes because they
have a communal usefulness of a moral and enlightening and refining
nature. Churches, these apologists would argue, have a vital place
in the social fabric and help hold men together in the texture of
civilized ethics and behavior.

     This claim on behalf of the churches is not really a thin
shade of a degree better than the claim of supernaturalism. It may
have an appearance or an intention of reason, but it is easily seen
to be untenable. We have only to inquire, with specific
seriousness, what the church (taking it in general as to the
institution of religion) contributes or has ever contributed to
civilization. In what field of life, for example, does the church
usefully instruct or guide men?

     It is not necessary to have a broad understanding of history
to realize that the church is the foe of knowledge. One realizes
this intellectual obscurantism and tyranny of the church more
vividly when one sees it against the background of dramatic
centuries; but, history aside, one can See this church antagonism
to knowledge operating today. The attacks upon the teaching of
evolution, culminating in several states in laws forbidding this
scientific instruction, show very clearly what the church thinks of
knowledge: it thinks that knowledge is very bad for religion and,
therefore, it sets all possible obstacles in the way of knowledge.
An uproar such as that occasioned by the sex questionnaire at the
University of Missouri reveals the hand of the church and the
influence of narrow church morality striking against the modern
scientific effort to learn soundly and sanely the art of living.
The church is compelled to compromise a good deal with the modern
spirit; but, given half an opportunity, it springs forth as the
enemy of culture.

     It would be impossible for any one to maintain with any show
of plausibility that the church is beneficial in the broader
cultural life of mankind. Whatever subject the church touches, that
subject the church inevitably obscures and corrupts and reduces to
nonsense. Concerning science, concerning history, concerning
ethics, concerning literature, concerning the affairs of government
-- in one field and in all fields, the church is engaged in the
promotion or the artificial bolstering up of decadent, empty,
luridly false notions. In every branch of learning, our gains have 


                         
                  
                               14

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

been made through secular agencies; and, naturally, this has been
so, for the church has never been interested in the development of
knowledge, regarding (in this showing its shrewdness of self-
interest, at least) the spread of culture and free thought and
realistic curiosity as unfavorable to the purposes of the church.

     As a moral influence, the church has been notoriously lacking
and indeed marred with definite viciousness and error. It has
supported all the social evils (monarchy, slavery, intolerance, the
oppression of women, and the like) that shame the record of man --
and some of these evils the church has not merely supported but has
inaugurated: the appalling slaughter and vileness of bigotry and
the punishment of heretics must, as a red-splashed feature, be laid
at the door of the church. The moral notions of the church have
been at once brash and puerile. Ethics, in the view and preachment
of the church, have been subordinated to theology. No institution
has done less good and more harm in the moral sphere than has the
church. The student of history cannot avoid the conclusion that,
had it not been for the distorting influence of the church, mankind
would today be immeasurably farther advanced along the Path of a
progressive, humane, intelligent code of behavior. The church's
pronouncements on morality have always been corrupted (that is to
say, weakened and broken and rendered futile) by its refusal to
understand that morality is solely a consideration of human, social
adjustments and is, from first to last, a worldly concern. The
church's preoccupation with "sin" has disabled it from approaching
moral questions sensibly.

     The church has contributed nothing to civilization. It has
progressed somewhat, and it has become a little more decent, in
reflection of the movements of civilization that have taken place
outside of the church and usually in the face of the strong
opposition of the church. But the church has always resisted the
process of civilization. It has struggled to the last ditch, by
fair means and foul, to preserve as long as it could the vestiges
of ancient and medieval theology, with all the puerile moralities
and harsh customs and medieval styles of belief.

     Our gains in culture, in humanity, in social law, in
scientific achievement -- in all the practical and in all the
gentler sides of life -- have been impressively due to the efforts
of secular thinkers and workers laboring outside the church. The
church hasn't led in civilization. It has always lagged behind the
march of civilization. It has been a burden to mankind. It is a
burden today, so that to speak of its social usefulness is to
express notoriously the opposite of the truth.

     There is no valid, not even a faintly plausible basis, for any
sort of claim in defense of the exemption of churches from
taxation. When the last church disappears, civilization will be
relieved of a serious and sinister burden. Meanwhile, the churches
should be made to pay their honest share of the cost of public
services which they, now enjoy freely and to which they contribute
nothing.

     Why should an atheist pay more taxes so that a church which he
despises should pay no taxes? That's a fair question. How can the 
apologists for the church exemption answer it?

                         
                  
                               15

                     A BIT OF CHURCH HISTORY

                          John W. Gunn 

     One thousand Years ago, the church (Roman Catholic) claimed
and, on the whole, effectually maintained supreme power in the
affairs of Europe. The church punished with torture and death those
who disagreed with its teachings. The church was the biggest
grafting Institution -- or, more plainly, robbing institution -- in
Europe, and it grew tremendously wealthy. The church admitted for
itself no obligations. It laid stern commands upon the people. It
was a vast machine of exploitation.

     With the growth of independent kingdoms and monarchs who ruled
genuinely and with no light hands within their own domains, the
church still held the major share of its original power. It
maintained its "spiritual" rule, which meant, in gigantic effect,
that all rival beliefs about religion were crushed and that the
masses were compelled to continue in their submission to
ecclesiastical robbery. The state and the church were closely
united machines of tyranny and exploitation.

     When secularism advanced (although it was far from complete)
and innumerable protestant sects came forth with new and strange
doctrines, established (state) churches were for long upheld both
in Protestant and Catholic countries and, frankly enough, these
churches were regarded as bulwarks of the oppressive governments
that patronized them. The church was not so powerful, but it was
still very powerful; and it was as greedy as ever.

     When religious toleration (for the various believers in
religion but not equally for, opponents of all religion) was won,
the church was less powerful, although it continued to be rich. In
countries (both Protestant and Catholic) where there were
established churches, those institutions were burdens upon the
state -- in other words, centers of graft and favoritism. They were
always taking from the state (which meant from the people) -- never
contributing to the public good.

     In the early days of American colonization, the church
maintained its privilege and power as it did in Europe. In
Virginia, for example, the Episcopal church (or Church of England)
was the ruling ecclesiastical machine, its doctrines absolutely
supreme and its financial demands supplied by taxation of the
citizens. In Massachusetts the sect of Calvinism held this strong,
favored position. In the early colonies, church and state were
practically the same, at any rate united in a close conspiracy of
oppression.

     After the American revolution and the legal separation of
church and state, the churches were all on an equal footing and
they did not directly control nor participate in the affairs of
government. But they were favored by tax exemption, blue laws
upholding religious bigotry were enforced (although they could not
be enforced regularly and consistently) and preachers retained a
very considerable, often a commanding influence upon the opinions
of the citizens. There was no strong opposition to the church;
religion held sway intellectually; and the argument that church and
state were mutually dependent and helpful was not disputed, insofar
as it implied special privilege, (though not political power) for
the church.
                         
                  
                               16

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     Throughout the nineteenth century, the preachers were very
influential, but their actual power of creating or guiding opinion
slowly but certainly dwindled, as politicians and newspaper editors
grew more powerful and as secular affairs, beyond the control of
the church, grew in recognized importance. At the beginning of the
twentieth century, preachers still had a great deal of prestige and
influence, and the churches held on to their special privileges,
chief among these being the privilege of tax exemption.

     Science and liberalism have added, in the first decades of the
twentieth century, to the brilliancy and power of secular history.
The supremacy of religion per se has long since been overthrown:
that is to say, there are no professedly religious doctrines in
which we must believe and there is no professedly religious control
over our lives. However, the churches have turned to operating
under the guise of moral reform organizations; and such a group as
the Methodist Board of Temperance, Prohibition and Public Morals
wields a very alarming, though in many ways an indirect and
insidious, power in our government. Yet the majority of Americans
do not attend church, do not believe in church doctrines and are
not interested in supporting the church. Skepticism grows steadily.
Secular affairs are foremost. Religion is dying, although the
church flourishes as a social and business institution.

     And let students of history reflect that, after all these
centuries, during which the power and greed of the church have been
manifested in every conceivable shape -- after all these centuries
the church is still an institution of special privilege and it is
at its old game of taking money from our pockets. Throughout all
its hanging history the church has been distinguished by its two
ruling motives of bigotry and greed. The church is still demanding
laws to enforce its bigotry (though it now commonly calls such
bigotry moral rather than religious) and laws to uphold it in its
financial privileges.

     There has been a series of significant revolutions within ten
centuries; mainly within the past two centuries, the world has
progressed sensationally. This progress has been secular in
character. Our age, in all that is beneficent and hopeful and
civilized, is irreligious. But the fact remains -- the stern fact
-- that the necessity of war on clericalism is not ended. It is a
serious problem in this modern age and until it is solved, until
clericalism is deprived of all its powers and privileges (retaining
only its rights of private propaganda), civilization will not be
safe.

                          ****     ****

                        THE RIGHTS OF MAN

     Among the clearest declarations in the historic rights of man
is the principle that all citizens shall be treated with equal
Justice and that no group of citizens shall be favored in any way
to the disadvantage of other groups. This means that no set of
private opinions shall be honored or subsidized by the state. It
means, logically and fairly, that the opinions of atheists are as
much entitled to respect and protection as the opinions of 
Christians.

                         
                  
                               17

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     Yet our governments, state and federal, violate amazingly this
clear principle of the rights of man. Special privileges are
extended to religion. Religious holiday proclamations are issued by
presidents and governors. Religious chaplains are employed in
legislative bodies, in the army and navy, and in other state
institutions. Public money, collected from the people in the form
of taxes, must pay for this gross favoritism that is shown to
religion. And the most flagrant injustice of all is the exemption
of church property from taxation.

     This exemption is doubly contrary to the principle of secular
freedom and equality of rights. It places a government sanction
upon the ideas of religion; it is an admission by government that
it favors the opinions of Christian citizens or citizens who
believe in religion and discriminates against the opinions of
atheists, agnostics, and all unbelievers in organized religion.
And, again, this tax exemption is not merely a moral sanction but
is a material aid given to the church. The state, in plain effect,
helps to pay for the upkeep of religion although, constitutionally,
church and state are supposed to be entirely apart and unrelated.

     The state helps to pay? What we should say is that millions of
non-religious citizens, millions of citizens who have no kind of
use for the church, are compelled to pay for this unjust
favoritism. As firm believers in the rights of man, as opponents of
inequality and tyranny in all forms, we demand the fair taxation of
all church property.

                     STATE GIFTS TO RELIGION

     A Cleveland, Ohio, reader sends us a clipping from the Press
of his city which reflects the interest shown in the church
taxation question. It seems that there has been some argument in
the section of the Press devoted to letters from its readers and
one of the disputants, signing the initials V.F.P., has stressed
the old fallacy that churches do educational and charitable work
and for this reason should be exempted from the payment of public
taxes and rates. A secular-minded reader, W. Mortimer, answers that
fallacy very clearly, and capably in the following communication to
the Press:

          The thing that V.F.P. and other religionists do not seem
     to grasp is the principle, of separation of Church and State.
     The amount of money is not so important as the principle
     involved.

          To say that because the parochial schools relieve the
     burden on the public schools they are therefore entitled to
     free water is indeed a flimsy argument. The secular authority
     establishes certain public activities that are essential to
     modern life, such as schools, libraries, police, parks, etc.
     These are all owned and used in common. Every citizen is
     justly required to contribute his or her share in support of
     all public activities.

     The law does not prohibit me from owning my own private
library or sending my children to a private school, yet I do not
expect free water on that account.

                         
                  
                               18

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

          Some corporations and individuals maintain their own
     police and fire depots. Yet they are not entitled to public
     money because of it. V.F.P. and myself, being citizens of the
     same country, must support the things we own in common. He or
     she belong to the Christian church, while I am an atheist.
     Neither of us can justly desire that the other financially
     support our private opinions or institutions. If V.F.P. feels
     the parochial schools are necessary to his or her well-being
     V.F.P. is at liberty to support them, but I cannot be expected
     to support a private institution in which I do not believe.

          By, non-payment of water and taxes, the churches are
     receiving public money as surely as if a like amount had been
     donated from the public treasury.


     Exactly. Mr. Mortimer, didn't waste time on sophistry. He just
cut right through it with sharp common sense. This talk of the
educational and charitable work done by the churches is an evasion
of the real issue. Plainly the interest of the churches is in
maintaining the beliefs and worship of religion. Any other alleged
purpose is remotely secondary and in modern society, unnecessary.
Education and social justice (as it should be considered rather
than charity) are essentially secular activities. To let the
churches go tax-free is to make gifts to religion: it means that
the state is granting public support to one set of private opinions
and thus unjustly burdening those who hold contrary private
opinions.

                        CHURCH AND PUBLIC

     The apologists for church tax exemption say that the church is
a public institution. Just what do they mean? The church is devoted
to the propaganda of religion, which is strictly a private and not
a public affair. It may be called public in the sense that anyone
may attend church meetings; but 80,000,000 out of the 120,000,000
don't want to attend church meetings, so evidently the church is
not offering a public service that is even popular; it is
unnecessary and is wanted only by the minority of church members.

     If the church were, in another and more valid sense, a public
institution -- that is, a building for use of the people without
discrimination -- there might be something in the argument for tax
exemption. But this consideration runs up against facts that cancel
it entirely. In the first place, the Church is not available to the
community or to various groups of the community on equal terms.
Atheists, for example, would not be permitted to hold meetings in
a church. The church doors would not be opened to admit a mass
meeting of protest against blue Sunday laws. A demonstration of
public sentiment against Prohibition would not be permitted in a
church. Dances, band concerts and like public recreational
activities are not usually permitted in a church.

     On most nights, the church buildings are empty and are put to
no use whatever. They never serve as genuine community centers.
Their use is limited strictly to religious and propaganda and the
promotion of movements which have a pious, puritanical character.
Public questions are not discussed freely in the church, They are 

                         
                  
                               19

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

discussed from the narrow viewpoint of religious bigotry. Public
interests are not served by the church. The specific purpose of the
church is to serve the interest of religion and to gain support for
the particular creed of each church organization.

     Under these plain circumstances it is impossible to argue
convincingly that the church is a public institution. There is no
good reason why the public generally should be compelled to share
in the cost of maintaining church institutions. These institutions
are conducted in the narrow interests of sectarian groups and these
groups should entirely pay the cost of them, including fair
taxation of every bit of property owned by the church.

     Let those who use the church, let those who believe in the
purposes of the church, produce every penny for the upkeep of the
church. This is the demand of justice.

     Exemption of the church from taxation is a tyrannical
compulsion upon millions of citizens to pay for something in which
they are not interested, in which they do not believe, and to which
many are profoundly opposed.

     Here is a fraud that is outrageous on its face and in every
feature. It is indefensible. All Americans  who have a real sense
of justice and who are candid enough to recognize the facts will
join in our demand that all church property shall be taxed.

                         "HOLY" BEGGARS

     The churches are always begging money. And there is little
pretense that this money is wanted for a public purpose. It is
wanted for the propaganda of religion. It is used to maintain
temples of superstition. It is a form of beggary that is sometimes
called "holy" (and that, to be sure, is always defended by the
allegation of good purposes;) but that is really a continual,
exasperating nuisance.

     Many who contribute to the churches are unwilling but feel
that they dare not refuse: these are men who, for business or
professional reasons, fear to offend the church element, or any
element, and make a practice of being agreeable to all groups.
There are many others who do refuse the begging requests of the
churches but who are irritated again and again by the repetition of
such appeals for help.

     In their begging, the churches are a nuisance. Yet, legally,
they have the right to get money from all who are willing to give.
We don't object to the extortion of money by the churches. But we
do object to the extortion of money for these begging institutions.
A state tax exemption for churches is in reality a form of
extortion, taking money from millions of citizens without so much
as a "by your leave,"

     The churches beg -- and if we don't give them money, why, they
take it anyway, forcibly, by means of this unjust state tax
exemption.



                         
                  
                               20

             IS THE STATE CONSISTENT IN SUBSIDIZING,
                         CHURCH ERRORS?

     One argument for the exemption of church property from
taxation is that religion is a socially valuable hind of activity
and that it is an instrument of righteousness which the state, as
a measure of public welfare, does rightly in subsidizing.

     Take a good look at that argument. It is really funny.
Religion is divided into many creeds. It is a patchwork of errors.
One sect contradicts another, and every church member is a heretic
in the view of members of other church organizations. What is it,
then, that the state can be sure of in religion to guide it in its
assumption that religion is useful?

     It cannot be a particular idea of God, for the religious sects
are sharply disagreed about the identity and the Character and the
opinions of God. It cannot be a particular notion of another life,
because the sects are luridly confused in their contradictory
notions of heaven or paradise or the hereafter or what you please
in the way of crude or fancy absurdity. It cannot be a particular
view of morality which the state thinks it publicly useful to
encourage by tax exemption -- for here, again, the sects are not in
agreement. Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, Catholics,
Lutherans Episcopalians, Christian Scientists, Holy rollers,
Modernists and Fundamentalists all have their hotly different
notions about what constitutes righteousness.

     There is no clear, agreed, indisputable program of religious
morality. If there did exist such a program, it would be brazenly
tyrannical for the state to enforce or even encourage it -- such a
measure would be a flagrant repudiation of the terms of secular
freedom in government (and, remember, good people, that secular
freedom is a phrase not to be shortened -- secular freedom is the
only freedom, for religion in government means tyranny) But our
point at the moment is that the state cannot pretend that it is
favoring, in a definite and intelligent way, a theory of social
usefulness in religion.

     TO be logical in this argument, the state would have to single
out one religious, creed and favor it as being the true and useful
creed, As matters stand, the state favors, by tax exemption and
other means, a perfectly ridiculous stew of irreconcilable and
indigestible religious errors. It can't say what is true in
religion. It can't say what is useful in religion. The supporters
of the various religions can't say wherein they are right: but each
sect maintains that it is right and the others are, on important
points, very wrong. In exempting the churches from taxation, the
state is subsidizing, most inconsistently, a medley of errors and
aberrations that are socially distracting and confusing, rather
than socially useful.

                          ****     ****

     The only excuse for state favoritism would be an open
declaration of support for a particular state church, a particular
state creed, a particular state system of errors officially
proclaimed as the truth. A state church is inconceivable in this
modern age, and, aside from the higher principle of intellectual 


                         
                  
                               21

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

liberty, the fact is that the churches couldn't agree among
themselves, There is no sensible argument, then, of truth, or
usefulness which justifies the state in favoring religion. Let the
believers in religion pay for their ceremonies and controversies of
error.

                          ****     ****

     The churches can well afford to pay fair taxation. But
supposing they couldn't. Would not that be a very significant
evidence that the churches were not really wanted?

                          ****     ****

     How can a preacher talk with a straight face about political
graft? He is, himself, profiting by one of the most notorious
political grafts in this country.

                          ****     ****

     A free, secular government has and should have no interest in
the church. The church is interesting only to its partisans. They
should bear the whole cost of supporting the church.

                          ****     ****

     Why should the residence of a preacher be untaxed? Useful
citizens must pay taxes on their homes. Yet the Preacher --
actually and notoriously the least useful member of the community
-- lives in a tax-free dwelling.

                          ****     ****

     "Would you tax God?" asks a defender of church tax exemption.
Well, if there were a God he should be able to pay his own way and
support his own business. If not, then he should do like other
business men and close up shop.

                          ****     ****

     Church tax exemption means that we all drop our money in the
collection boxes, whether we go to church or not and whether we are
interested in the church or not. It is systematic and complete
robbery, from which none of us escapes.

                          ****     ****
     It is an absurd fiction that the churches are useful. They are
nothing more than propaganda centers for superstitious faiths and
doctrines. Church members have a right to believe in and propagate
their various doctrines. But they should pay every item of the
cost, of this propaganda, including fair taxation for all church 
property.



                          ****     ****


 
                         
                  
                               22

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     When priest and king conspired in medieval tyranny, the church
did its bloodiest to suppress all freedom of thought. We live in
the modern age and we believe in liberty. We don't ask that the
churches be destroyed or religion suppressed. We ask only that the
churches be taxed fairly, as other property is taxed. In resisting
this very fair demand, the churches will only expose their motives
of greed and Injustice.

                          ****     ****

     Churches are private institutions. Their members should
support these churches out of their own private resources.

                          ****     ****

     Those who want the churches should pay for them. Nobody else
should be taxed, directly or indirectly, to support the churches.

                          ****     ****

     There can be no perfect freedom unless the church and state
are separated. But the church and state are not separated in
America so long as the state grants a subsidy to the church in the
form of tax exemption.

                          ****     ****

     It is surely enough that the clerical grafters are permitted
by law to drum up trade among many credulous victims. But it is
outrageously too much that the rest of us, who oppose the clerical
grafters, should have to pay for the maintenance of this graft.

     We think that men and women who pay for listening to sermons
are being cheated. But if they are satisfied, well enough. They can
spend their money as they please. The point is that we don't want
to continue paying for sermons that offend us with their bigotry
and non-sense.

                          ****     ****

     The American colonists fought against taxation without
representation. We are fighting against what is ironically much
worse, namely, taxation for the benefit of churches in which we
don't want to be represented and which are inimical to all the
civilized public purposes in which we do want to be represented.

                          ****     ****

     Is a church too small and too poor to pay taxes? That means
that not enough people want the church seriously enough to pay for
its upkeep. Then, why should such a church exist? Why should
atheists, agnostics and non-churchgoers be forced to maintain such
a useless, unwanted church by granting it tax exemption?

                          ****     ****




                         
                  
                               23

        WHY I BELIEVE IN FAIR TAXATION OF CHURCH PROPERTY

     Religion is matter of private opinion. And, similarly,
religion should be a matter of private support, There is no good,
honest reason why it should have the sanction of the financial
favoritism of the government. Legally and in its fundamental policy
(as set forth in the Constitution) ours is not a religious
government and, therefore, it should not in any way subsidize
religion.

                          ****     ****

     It is a ludicrous notion -- ludicrous and outrageous -- that
the 80,000,000 Americans who don't go near the churches and who are
not interested in the churches should pay, in the form of state tax
exemption, so that the 40,000,000 of churchgoers can have houses in
which to play. After all, these 40,000,000 could do their praying
cheaply at home -- and it would do them no more and no less good.
If they want special houses of prayer, let them contribute all of
the money for this odd purpose. We object to paying a cent for
praying institutions which are ridiculous in our sight.

                          ****     ****

     Rev. John Haynes Holmes argues that the churches shouldn't pay
taxes because, amid the towering city skyscrapers, they afford
needful light and air. But now the churches are growing into
skyscrapers. And, anyway, parks and tennis courts and the like are
much better for light and air than churches are. To put it more
emphatically, the churches spread gloom and the air in and around
them is unbearably stuffy.

                          ****     ****

     "God hasn't quit" says a theological illogical professor. That
might be an interesting statement if there could be adduced the
tiniest bit of proof that God ever began anything, including
himself. What this professor means is that a few men, who have
worse than idle minds, haven't quit talking aimlessly about a
mythical God.

                          ****     ****

     "The atmosphere is literally charged with religion" says 'The
Literary Digest," referring to radio sermons. We should call it a
spreading of intellectually poisonous gas

                          ****     ****

     Martyrs have been sincere. And so have tyrants. Wise men have
been sincere. And so have fools.

                          ****     ****
    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

   The  is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books, magazines,
newspapers, pamphlets, etc. please contact us, we need to give them
back to America.

 CHILDREN FIRST: BUILDING A GLOBAL AGENDA
                              by Audrey Hepburn

Actress Audrey Hepburn spent five years of her young life in Nazi-occupied
Holland during World War II. She survived the deprivation with a "marvellous
family," a diet consisting largely of turnips, and "wonderful conversations
about what we were going to eat after the war." When the end of the war came,
she was one of the first recipients of UNICEF aid to Europe. Hepburn could not
have known then that more than four decades later, in 1988, she would be
invited by UNICEF to take on "her most wonderful and rewarding role," as
fellow actor Gregory Peck put it 

                         UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. 

Her compassion and commitment carry her beyond fund-raising benefits to
sometimes difficult and dangerous fieldwork in countries such as Ethiopia,
Sudan, and El Salvador. For all her efforts, she is paid by UNICEF the royal
sum of US$1 per year. Hepburn gave the following talk recently at the
Commonwealth Club in San Francisco.  


    "Until four years ago when I was given the great privilege of
    becoming a volunteer for UNICEF, I, like all of you, was overwhelmed
    by a sense of helplessness when watching television or reading about
    the indescribable misery of the children and their mothers in the
    developing world.  If I feel less helpless today, it's because I have
    now seen what can be done, and what is being done by UNICEF, by many
    marvellous agencies, churches, governments, and most of all, with
    very little help, by people themselves.  

    Today we stand at the crossroads: Our world has changed dramatically
    in a short time, and we must now plot a new course for the future.
    I'm here on behalf of UNICEF to talk about where children fit into
    the new course, to talk about priorities. We have to recognize that
    children have not been our greatest priority, but they must be. And
    if we seize the opportunity now before us, they really can be.  

    I was among the first recipients of UNICEF aid after World War II,
    which is why I have such a deep, personal appreciation for UNICEF.
    Mine was the first generation to live in the ominous shadow of the
    nuclear age, and we were the first children to grow up with the term
    "Cold War" and all its divisive and paranoid implications. We had
    survived the bombing of Europe only to find ourselves, in a very real
    sense, coming of age in another war, the costs of which were very
    steep indeed.

                                Deaf ears

    This conflict between East and West soon became a political framework
    for the entire globe. The superpowers intervened in developing
    countries in order to gain territorial advantages, and rival factions
    in these countries were all too willing to choose sides in exchange
    for support in their internal struggles. The prevailing world order
    was marked by barricades, real and imaginary, and it fostered a
    mentality of us versus them.  The real losers, of course, were the
    children: the children of Africa, Latin America, Asia, and the Middle
    East who suffered from daily neglect. The choice between guns and
    bread had never been more immediate nor lopsided as it was during the
    height of the Cold War. 

    UNICEF, the world's leading voice for children, tried to protect
    them. UNICEF reminded governments time and again that the needs of
    children were urgent and the most important, but its warnings fell on
    ears that were either deaf or simply too preoccupied to listen.  When
    I first became involved with UNICEF, the organization that had meant
    so much to me and many other children in post-war Europe, I didn't
    think I'd live to see the end of that bitter struggle. Like the
    children of countries like Lebanon and Mozambique, who have known
    little peace, I had grown up with the Cold War, and it was part of
    all of our lives. 

    Then, and it seemed to happen overnight, the world changed
    dramatically. Like the Berlin Wall and the Soviet empire, the old
    order has come tumbling down. We now have something that is so rare
    in the course of civilization: a second chance.

                            Quiet catastrophe

    Now, more than 45 years after it pleaded with the world to remember
    its children, UNICEF is once again making the case for our next
    generation.  As the new world order comes into focus, UNICEF is
    reminding the world's leaders of the devastating realities. While the
    world was busy fortifying the ideological chasm that divided it, the
    children have been paying for it with their lives: 40,000 a day, 15
    million a year. No earthquake, no flood, ever claimed 40,000 children
    on a single day. Though these children are the quiet catastrophe and
    never make headlines, they are just as dead.  By any measure this is
    the greatest tragedy of our times. They've been dying from
    preventable diseases, including measles and tuberculosis. They've
    been dying in wars, caught in the cross-fire of those who should have
    been protecting them. They've been dying for lack of proper nutrition
    when the world has more than enough food. They've been dying from
    dehydration caused by diarrhea more than from any other single cause
    because they don't have clean drinking water.  

                        World Summit for Children

    In September of 1990, when the old world order was showing signs of
    collapse, UNICEF hosted 71 heads of state at the World Summit for
    Children in New York to address the appalling situation of children.
    The summit yielded a historic agreement on specific goals to help
    children by the year 2000.  In its latest message to the world's
    leaders, UNICEF released its 1992 State of the World's Children
    Report. In this year's report, UNICEF offers 10 agenda items for the
    formation of a new world order.  

    I won't talk about all the specific propositions, but I would like to
    mention a few of them: 

    a) That the promises of the World Summit for Children be kept. These
    include a one-third reduction in child deaths, and a halving of child
    malnutrition by the year 2000.  

    b) That demilitarization should begin in the developing world, and
    that falling military expenditures in the industrialized countries
    should be linked to increased, unconditional international aid and
    the solving of global problems. Currently, developing countries spend
    about $150,000 million on arms each year. Meanwhile, the five
    permanent members of the UN Security Council sell 90 per cent of the
    world's arms.  What does this mean? It means that we are entrenched
    as a global community in a destructive cycle of weapons
    proliferation. Achieving all of the summit goals would require some
    $20,000 million a year, an amount equal to two-thirds of the
    developing world's military spending, and just 1 per cent of that in
    industrialized countries.

    c) That the growing consensus around market economies be accompanied
    by a commitment to a strong investment in people, especially
    children. Simply put, this means that there are things that a free
    market alone cannot do. Governments must combine free-market forces
    with assurances of health and education for all, especially children,
    even in bad economic times. The importance of this proposition is not
    limited to developing countries. As UNlCEF's report also points out,
    the situation of urban and poor children in the United States
    continues to worsen. Child poverty is on the rise, and the real value
    of Aid to Families with Dependant Children has dropped 40 per cent in
    the last 20 years. Even here, in the country that is the world's
    model of a free economy, we are slow to realize that all children do
    not benefit from that system. We must build what amounts to a safety
    net to catch these children before it is too late.  There are some
    encouraging signs that the world's leaders may listen this time. The
    World Summit for Children is clearly one of them. The United Nations
    Convention on the Rights of the Child has now been ratified by 107
    countries, and more than 30 others have signed it with the intention
    to ratify.

                          Miracle of the decade

    Last October I was at the United Nations with President Carter and
    other dignitaries when UNICEF and the World Health Organization
    certified to the Secretary General that they and the world's
    governments had achieved their goal of universal child immunization
    by 1990. This is the miracle of this decade. This does not mean that
    we have immunized every child or that every country is winning the
    battle with vaccine-preventable diseases. It does mean that 80 per
    cent of the world's one-year olds have been immunized against the six
    major child-killing diseases: measles, tuberculosis, tetanus,
    whooping cough, diphtheria, and polio. This effort is saving some 3
    million young lives each year. 

    In 1974, less than 5 per cent of the developing world's children were
    vaccinated.   It's difficult to grasp the full meaning of these
    successes until you've looked into the eyes of these children who can
    too often be numbers. Rather than share with you the horrors I've
    witnessed, I prefer to remind you of how easy it is to reach out and
    help these children.   There has never been a better opportunity to
    give our children the future they deserve.    We have low-cost
    technologies like immunization and oral rehydration therapy. We have
    ample resources made available due to the end of the Cold War, and we
    have the commitment of the world's leaders. What remains is for us to
    change our attitudes as a society, to build a movement for children,
    and to ensure that the promises of the World Summit for Children are
    kept.   

    Twenty years ago, few people thought about recycling their
    newspapers, few people worried about the effect of hair spray on the
    ozone layer, few people questioned the amount of pollution their cars
    were spewing into the atmosphere, but slowly and effectively the
    environmentalists in this country and around the world built a
    movement that could not be ignored, and they have brought about a
    fundamental change in the way we live our lives and the way we see
    our planet. We have taken responsibility for our neglect. So too must
    we take responsibility for the neglect of our children. So too must
    we effect a basic change in our priorities and concerns. We must
    resolve ourselves as a community to put the needs of children first
    in war and in peace, in good times and in bad.

    So today, I speak for children who can't speak for themselves,
    children who are going blind from lack of vitamins, children who are
    slowly being mutilated by polio, children who are wasting away in so
    many ways from lack of water. I speak for the estimated 100 million
    street children in this world, who have no choice but to leave home
    in order to survive, who have absolutely nothing but their courage,
    their smiles, their wits, and their dreams; for children who have no
    enemies, yet are invariably the first tiny victims of war, wars that
    are being waged through terror, intimidation, and massacre; for
    children who are therefore growing up surrounded by the horrors of
    violence; for the hundreds of thousands that are refugees; and for
    the rapidly increasing number of children suffering from or orphaned
    by AIDS.  

                          The great task ahead

    The task that lies ahead for UNICEF is ever great, whether it's
    repatriating millions of children in Africa or Asia, or teaching
    children how to play who only have learned how to kill. Children are
    our most vital resource, our hope for the future. Until they can be
    assured of not only physically surviving the first fragile years of
    life, but are free of emotional, social, and physical abuse, it's
    impossible to envisage a world that is free of tension and violence.
    It is up to us to make it possible. Charles Dickens wrote: "In their
    little world, in which children have their existence, nothing is so
    finely perceived and so finely felt as injustice" injustice which we
    can avoid by giving more of ourselves.  Yet we often hesitate in the
    face of such apocalyptic tragedy. Why, when the way and low-cost
    means are in place to safeguard and protect these children? It is for
    leaders, parents, and young people - young people who have the purity
    of heart which sometimes age tends to obscure - to remember their own
    childhood and come to the rescue of those who start life against such
    heavy odds. Simply because they are children, every child has the
    right to health, to education, to protection, to tenderness, to life.


                   Interview with Maitreya's associate

  Two journalists, working independently, regularly contribute articles
to Share International based on interviews with one of Maitreya's close
associates. This month we received a contribution from Brian James.

                  The whole world is becoming bankrupt
                             by Brian James
                               29 May 1992

 World Collapse - It is not only large financial institutions which are
tumbling into bankruptcy, the whole world is becoming bankrupt - mentally
and spiritually, said Maitreya's associate. The world is going through a
huge crisis and all the medicines have been tried and failed. Maitreya
says that the tumour has got to burst open before the healing can begin,
he said.
 The world is in such a chaotic state that it could happen at any time.
The politicians and the generals can do nothing to stop it - everything
they have tried to avert disaster has failed.
 The Tokyo Stock Market has been turned by the politicians and
businessmen into a giant monster serving only a culture of greed. Now it
is crashing like everything else. Even the United Nations is being forced
to serve the interests of the strong and the greedy. Only charitable
institutions, like Oxfam, are caring for the weak and the needy;
governments are too caught up in killing and destroying.
 Scientists have become like witches - brewing up new creatures through
genetic experiments to make money.
 Crime is on the increase throughout the Western world. Look at the faces
of the politicians, they have no sparkle. What is happening is beyond
their comprehension. The world is like a volcano waiting to erupt - in
fact it is only a matter of time before it bursts open.    America - The
disintegration that is taking place in the former Soviet Union is now
happening in America. The Los Angeles riots are not an isolated outburst.
Every state is crumbling and it is worsening day by day, said the
associate.
 The states are desperately turning to the Federal Government for aid,
but it is not forthcoming. The associate claimed that America was
suffering in retribution for that country's indiscriminate bombing of
Iraq.
    Britain - This country faces the same disintegration as America. Are
the people happy? No, there is no happiness here, there is so much
friction and confusion, said the associate. There is going to be a
massive revolt as people take to the streets and demand action to bring
back harmony and justice. Not even the police or the military will be
able to control it.    Japan - The Japanese are sitting on a time bomb.
The destruction would be far worse than in any other Western country,
said the associate.    Yugoslavia - Why didn't the American, British and
other Western powers send in military forces to stop the Yugoslavian army
from slaughtering innocent people? It is because they could not see any
gain in doing so, unlike their need to protect their oil interests in
Kuwait. They only evaluate humanity on a material level, said the
associate.

                          QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
                            by Benjamin Creme

 Q. I should be more than interested to know whether, following the
report of the appearance of Maitreya in Nairobi in 1988, further
appearances have been reported in other parts of the world.
 A. As regular readers of Share International will know, Maitreya has
made, since June 1988 in Nairobi, a series of appearances in like manner
_ that is, appearing (and disappearing) before large (until now, orthodox
Christian) gatherings in different parts of the world, on which we still
await media comment and reaction. These have been, so far: September
1991, Mexico City; January 1992, Mexico City; 1 March 1992, Moscow; 22
March 1992, Leipzig, Germany; 5 April 1992, Hanover, Germany; 26 April
1992, D*sseldorf, Germany; and 24 May 1992 in Switzerland. These
appearances will continue until media investigate and report on the
phenomenon.
 As my Master reveals in His article in this [printed] issue of Share
International, they are being accompanied by mysterious and miraculous
events which have yet to reach the ears of the general public. Already,
at Tlacote, not far from Mexico City, a spring of water has surfaced with
amazing healing properties. Similar manifestations will be found in due
course, near the cities at which Maitreya has appeared - further signs of
His presence.
    Q. (1) There are plans for a major international Christian festival
in Birmingham, UK, featuring Reinhard Bonnke, one of the world's leading
evangelists. Crowds of up to 35,000 are expected to attend the meetings
at the end of July. Is this the type of gathering at which Maitreya would
make an appearance? (2) Has He made such an appearance at a gathering at
all in England?
 A. (1) These meetings in Birmingham in July might well seem ideal
opportunities for Maitreya to appear before large gatherings of people
with, most probably, media coverage as well. We can be sure, too, that
Maitreya is not unaware of this fact.  However, it is my information that
He has no plans to appear there. Working strictly within the Law
governing our free will (which conditions the pace of His emergence), His
aims at present are less ambitious: so far, apart from Nairobi in June
1988, He has been appearing to groups of between 500 and 900 people.
However, with Maitreya, everything is fluid and mobile, and, if
circumstances permitted (due to humanity's action for the better), I have
no doubt He would avail Himself of wider opportunities to make His
presence known in this way.
 (2) To Christian groups, no; but since 1977, He has spoken to large
audiences within the Asian community, not, however, appearing and
disappearing but in the ordinary way.
    Q. Is Maitreya 'in on' the "One World Government" of President Bush
and the infamous "Tri-Lateralists"? I pray that the two are not the same.
 A. President Bush's vision of a "New World Order" and "One World
Government" envisages an order in which the US, and therefore capitalism,
dominates and celebrates its triumph over a defunct communist ideology.
As I understand it, this is certainly not consistent with Maitreya's
predictions of a new political process (neither capitalism nor communism)
in which the voice and will of the peoples of the world are given
expression; in which consensus rather than confrontation and competition
will be the hallmarks; and in which a new political/economic structure -
Democratic Socialism or Social Democracy, symbolized by the reunification
of East and West Germany - will become the norm throughout the world.

    Q. Could you give the point in evolution and ray structure of the
science fiction writer Isaac Asimov (1920 -1992)?
 A. Soul 3; Personality 4, sub-ray 6; Mental 7, sub-ray 3; Astral 4,
sub-ray 6; Physical 3, sub-ray 7. He was 1.6 degrees initiate.

    Q. Was Rasputin overshadowed by any of the Masters? If so, were they
trying to bring about reforms to defuse an explosive situation which led
to the downfall of the Tsars and the ruling aristocracy?
 A. No.

    Q. In one of your books you say that the astral is only an
illusionary level of consciousness. I don't quite understand that.
 A. The astral planes, the emotional/astral planes, exist as energy. The
function of our astral-emotional body is to act as a physical-plane
expression or vehicle for 'buddhi'. Buddhi is the second of the three
planes of the spiritual triad. The nature of atman, of the Self, is
spiritual will, spiritual love/wisdom and spiritual intelligence, and
these are reflected in the soul as atma, buddhi and manas. They all need
a vehicle, and the vehicle for buddhi (love/wisdom or group
consciousness, - intuition, group awareness) is the purified
astral/emotional body in the advanced individual, particularly, of
course, in a Master.

 The average individual is still caught up in the desire, rather than the
spiritual, principle. Desire governs the function of the personality and
the vehicles of the personality (the physical body, the astral-emotional
body and the mental body); but the physical body purified, the
astral/emotional body purified, and the mental body purified eventually
become the vehicles for atma, buddhi and manas. Until that point is
reached the person is swept along by the illusions of the astral plane
which are created by the thoughtform-making process of humanity.

 We have a physical body with an etheric sheath. The physical body dies
and is put in the ground or burned, but the etheric counterpart of that
body is a sheath which, normally within three days, dissipates and
returns to the ocean of etheric matter which surrounds us all. We are
then left in our astral sheath in which we exist for a shorter or longer
time on one or other of the seven astral planes (hopefully the higher
planes, because the lower are terrible). The more advanced a person is
the more he or she will be on the higher planes, and the less time will
be spent on these planes.

 On the astral planes there are 'facsimiles' of various Masters - the
Masters DK, Morya, Koot Hoomi, Serapis, Jesus, Hilarion and various other
Masters, created, as astral thoughtforms, by humanity. There are many
mediumistic, astrally sensitive individuals who 'receive' from these
'facsimiles' so-called 'teachings from the Masters' which are more or
less erroneous.

 Originally, the teachings came from the real Masters through people like
Alice Bailey, Eleanor Roerich, Helena Blavatsky, and which are reflected
back on to the astral planes by the disciples of the world. They are then
reflected back again through the astral sensitives with all the
distortions of the astral planes - the planes of distortion. It is like
what happens in dreams. Can you believe what happens in your dreams? The
astral planes are your dreams because your dreams happen on the astral
plane, are the result of the faculty of the lower mind during light sleep
- in deep sleep there is no dreaming - to create astral thoughtforms.
This activity of the lower mind goes on and on, the most fantastic things
happen. Then you wake up. The astral planes are as real as your dreams;
that is what I mean by the unreality of the astral planes.

    Q. How important is diet - the eating of dairy or vegetable products,
for example - in the pursuit of perfection?
 A. It depends at what stage one is. For those coming up to the first
initiation, vegetarianism is usually a requirement, and at that stage
people usually automatically become vegetarian. They know, because as you
come towards the first initiation the soul prompts you.

 The first initiation becomes possible when you have made contact with
your soul. For long ages the soul is not the slightest bit interested in
its vehicle, its reflection, the man or woman in these successive
incarnations. The person is so removed from the soul, so cut off from it,
that there is nothing the soul can do, but eventually, as it is
approaching the first initiation - say, two or three lives before the
first initiation - the soul sees that things are beginning to happen; its
reflection is beginning to respond. It stimulates its vehicles and begins
to build the 'antahkarana', a column of light from the soul to the
person, and it introduces the person to meditation of some kind.

        Meditation is a more or less scientific method (depending on the
meditation) of coming into contact with the soul and eventually becoming
at-one with it. So the soul brings the person to meditation, and, more
and more, pours its energy into the person, on all planes - physical,
astral/ emotional, and mental. It 'grips' its vehicle in this way, while
the person meditating is building this antahkarana up towards the soul.
He becomes more idealistic, more aspiring, because the soul is pouring
down what we call the Christ Principle - the soul is the Christ
Principle, the principle of consciousness. This stimulates the aspiration
towards a higher life, and the person's predilections, their interests,
begin to change. They usually become more serious, less wasteful of time,
they get bored with earlier pursuits and are attracted to a deeper, more
meaningful aspect, coming from the soul.  They begin to relate to
humanity in a broader sense, to feel responsibility, and they begin to
want to serve the world in some way. They usually think they should
become vegetarian and eventually it becomes a must for them. This is
because the first initiation is the result of the control of the physical
elemental.

       All of our bodies are made up of the life activity of tiny little
devic, or angelic, lives. This body that we think is solid physical is
made up of the activity of little devas, little angels, tiny little devic
lives, and they control us or we control them - it is one or the other.

     The first initiation is only possible when we control their activity
rather than they ours. The second initiation is only possible when we
control the activity of the astral devas, the third when we control the
activity of the mental devas. These three vehicles of the soul on the
physical plane have to be controlled. The readiness for the first
initiation demonstrates when we have a good degree of control over the
activity of the physical body _ not too much food, not too much sex, not
too much drink, not too much of anything; it does not have to be a
totally vegetarian diet. There are fanatics around in every sphere but
you will find that there is always a purification of the diet which leads
to purification of the body.

 Then for the second initiation you begin to work on the control of the
astral/emotional reactions to life. The soul through the mental body
controls the astral body, and then the soul through the mental body
controls the mental body itself.
 Once these three controls are established, the three initiations can
take place and you are divine. At the fourth initiation the soul is no
longer needed _ it is the divine intermediary between the spark of God
and the man or woman on the physical plane. The vehicle for the soul, the
body of the soul on the soul plane (called the causal body), is shattered
and the soul is reabsorbed into the divine Self, the spark of God. The
man then stands as a living God, a divine God-man. Until the third
initiation is taken you are potentially divine but not yet totally
divine.
 So it is to do with the impulse of the soul that one comes into
vegetarianism. Once you have proved that you have control, the need for
control does not become so marked. The habit goes on but it is not
essential.

    Q. Do animals have souls?
 A. Individually, no. Animals are expressions of a group soul _ there is
the soul which is 'cat', or 'dog', or 'horse' or 'camel', but they do not
have individualized souls in the way humans have. The individualization
of humanity occurred, according to esoteric teachings, no less than
18-and-a-half million years ago.

    Q. Who taught you so that you have reached the stage where you can
meet a Master? This is my first meeting here and I feel very frustrated
because there seems a lot to know and a lot to learn. Why can't Share
International have a sort of Entity that people who want to know and
learn can learn from?
 A. You mean why don't we start a school? A school would require a group
of teachers who know at least a page more than others do in order to
teach - and there are groups all over the world who do nothing else. Our
task is not to set up a school but to make known that the Christ is in
the world, that the Masters are returning - there are now 14 Masters in
the world besides Maitreya - and to prepare the way, to create the
climate of hope, of expectancy, for His coming, so that He can enter our
lives without infringing human free will. That is a full-time job - just
to publish Share International is pretty-well a full-time job. To travel
around the world as I do is almost a full-time job. Besides that I am a
painter, I am married, have two children, I have to sleep occasionally, I
have to eat sometimes ... you are asking the impossible!

 Let me just say, if you want to know about the esoteric teachings in the
academic sense, read the Alice Bailey teachings. There are 24 books, they
are available in all the esoteric bookshops. The first was published in
1922. Start with these, with Initiation Human and Solar and go on. No one
need be short of something to read.

    Q. Could you please give the ray-structure and point in evolution of
the late healer and medium Estelle Roberts?
 A. Soul 2; personality 6, sub-ray 4; mental body 6, sub-ray 4; astral
body 6, sub-ray 2; physical body 3, sub-ray 3. She was 1.2 degrees
initiate.

    Q. It is thought that the late Vicky Wall, who was given the formulas
for the soul colour therapy 'Aura-Soma' through direct channelling, has
returned to Sirius. Could you confirm this please?
 A. I must confess that this question makes me smile. Sirius is the
alter-ego of this Solar system and only Masters of the fifth initiation
or higher may _ if it is Their destiny _ go to Sirius and, by the same
token, only Avatars can come from Sirius to this planet.
 The late Vicky Wall had not yet taken the first initiation; her point in
evolution was 0.8. So much for "direct channelling", 99.999 per cent of
which comes from the astral planes _ the planes of illusion.

    Q. Can you please give the ray structure and point in evolution of
the late German philosopher Martin Heidegger?
 A. Soul 4; Personality 3, sub-ray 7; mental body 4, sub-ray 6; astral
body 6, sub-ray 2; physical body 7, sub-ray 3. He was 1.7 degrees
initiate.

    Q. Please give the ray structure and point in evolution of the late
Arthur Rubinstein, the famous pianist.
 A. Soul 2; Personality 4, sub-ray 4; mental body 4, sub-ray 6; astral
body 6, sub-ray 6; physical body 7, sub-ray 7. He was 1.75 degrees
initiate.
   
    Benjamin Creme _ meetings and tours
    
    UK _ Benjamin Creme lectures at Friends' Meeting 
    House, Euston Road, London NW1: Thursday 16 July, 
    Thursday 6 August. Lectures begin 7 pm; doors 
    open/literature available 6.30 pm. Enquiries: % 
    071-485 1739 or fax/answerphone: % 071-482 1113.
    Canada _ Vancouver BC: Lecture, 26 June; 
    Meditation, 27 June
    Enquiries: % 604-736-8272
    USA _ Los Angeles: Lecture, 30 June; Meditation, 1 
    July
    Enquiries: % 818-785-6300
    Mexico _ Mexico City: Lecture, 4 July; Meditation, 
    5 July
    USA _ San Francisco: Meditation, 8 July; Lecture, 9 
    July
    Enquiries: % 510-841-3738
    Tara Center Network Conference, 10-12 July.
    Holland _ Lecture, 17 September; International 
    Transmission Meditation Conference, September 
    18-20. Enquiries: PO Box 41877, 1009 DB Amsterdam.
    Germany _ Munich: 8-9 October. Enquiries: % 
    089-12332522; Hamburg: 10-11 October. Enquiries: % 
    040-5552216.
    Switzerland _ Geneva: 24-25 October. Enquiries: % 
    021-369984. Zurich: 26-27 October.
    

                      Islamic fundamentalism today
                          by Aziz-ud-Din Ahmad

It was peculiar to see Afghan pakols - the woolen caps typically worn in
Peshawar and Kabul - on the heads of protesters in the capital of
Algeria. Stranger still, a few weeks later, to hear that the "Afghans"
had attacked the city's police.  Algeria had become the latest country to
be rocked by Islamic Fundamentalism, a movement that today haunts the
entire Muslim world from Morocco to Indonesia. Like the ghost of Hamlet's
father, it is here, there and everywhere. 

Its force, however, differs from region to region and from country to
country. Somewhere a ripple, at other places a minor current, it has
assumed the form of a storm at least in two countries.  The storm centre
is the Middle East, where fundamentalism achieved its first victory when
the Iranian clergy overthrew Shah Reza Pahlavi in violent revolution.
Iran became a beacon of light for fundamentalists in Muslim countries the
world over.  Here was a country bravely introducing a system of laws,
based on the Koran, which many Westernized Muslims had regarded as
impractical. It had gone even further: it challenged the two superpowers
simultaneously.  Could this system bring prosperity and enlightenment to
the downtrodden Muslim masses of the Third World? Could it help them
achieve a respectable place among the nations of the world, denied to
them since the overthrow of the Abbasids in Baghdad and the Ummawis in
Andalusia? 

Not only fundamentalists but many other Muslims looked towards
revolutionary Iran in wonder and awe.  Islamic fundamentalist parties
languishing in neighboring countries received moral encouragement and
were revitalized. Egypt came first, with the Ikhwan, or Muslim
Brotherhood, goaded to new activity by the Iranian example. Taking full
benefit of the freedoms allowed to them by the government of Hosny
Mubarak, they plunged into the political arena, gaining (in alliance with
the socialist Labour Party) 60 National Assembly seats in the 1987
elections.A similar feat was performed by the Ikhwan in Jordan in the
1989 elections. In the kingdom's first general elections in 22 years, the
fundamentalists garnered no less than 20 seats in a house consisting of
only 80 deputies. In alliance with 12 other like-minded members, this
gave them the largest single voting bloc.  While participating in
elections in Egypt and Jordan, the Ikhwan have by no means confined
themselves to democratic methods alone. 

In neighboring Sudan, they fully supported the military led by Brigadier
Omar Hasan Ahmad al-Bashir, who overthrew Sadiq al-Mahdi. As reward, they
were the only political group represented in the new cabinet.  Islamic
fundamentalism is also on the rise in the Arab Meghreb, which might well
become its second stronghold after the Middle East. 1990 was marked by
outbursts of fundamentalism in both Tunisia and Morocco.  Violent
protests by fundamentalists in that year led to arrests in Tunisia. The
clash with police apparently involved a protest at the government's
handling of flood victims in the country. The militancy, however, was an
expression of the new spirit with which fundamentalism has been animated
in recent years.  In Morocco that same year about 2,000 fundamentalists
were beaten and arrested when they took to the streets demanding the
release of six jailed leaders.  


Algeria, however, has emerged as the stronghold of the resurgent
fundamentalism in the Arab Maghreb. Strange for a country where Western
culture has left widespread impact. Unlike Iran, where most people do not
know any European language, virtually all Algerians speak French as a
second language. Half the country gets its daily news from the French
media, while 4 million Algerians live abroad in Italy, Spain or France,
frequently traveling back and forth.  Fundamentalists won the Algerian
municipal elections over a year ago and were on the verge of coming to
power through a thumping electoral victory in the recent general
elections when they were stopped short by the military (which has in fact
ruled Algeria since its liberation in 1962). The military top brass,
trained in elite French military schools, were perhaps afraid of what
fundamentalism might do to their lifestyles.  After initially showing
restraint, the fundamentalists are now on the war path against the army,
which they regard as a usurper of power. The Islamic Salvation Front
(FIS) is demanding that the election results be respected and that the
current ruling council bow to the will of people. It is still too early
to predict the outcome of that confrontation.  

In the Asia-Pacific region, meanwhile, the cradle of the Islamic
fundamentalist movement is Indonesia. The former Dar-ul-Islam and the
Masjumi Party have been replaced by the new fundamentalist Partai
Persatuan Pembongan, or PPP. In Indonesia, fundamentalists have tried a
number of methods to come to power, from participation in elections to
insurrection.  Targeted by Soekarno, against whom they had never taken
arms, the fundamentalists had hoped for better treatment from Suharto,
especially as they had collaborated with him in the massacre of
Indonesian communists. But Suharto was slow in allowing them to function.
Nevertheless, with the Communist Party -- the second-largest in Asia
after China's--banned and its rank and file killed and jailed in
thousands, the Indonesian PPP has emerged as the second-largest party in
the Parliament. The ruling Golkar Party got 299 seats in the 1987
elections, while the PPP won 61 seats and the PDI, the pro-Soekarno
party, lagged behind with no more than 40 seats. 

There is also an Islamic party in Malaysia, which calls itself Partie
Islam Pas, or PAS for short. Though the party has little impact on
national politics, it has formed government in one of the provinces in
coalition with the ruling party of Mohatir Mohammad.  In Pakistan, Jama
at-e-Islami represents the fundamentalist trend. Formed in 1941, it has
enjoyed little electoral strength, being more of a cadre party than a
mass party. Despite its discipline and a formidable propaganda machine,
it could only bag four seats in the 1970 national elections. Its
performance in 1988 and 1990 was better because of the electoral alliance
it made with the Muslim League and others, but it stands as nothing
compared to the other parties in the country.  

The Soviet entry in Afghanistan revived the fundamentalist trend that had
remained latent in that country before then. The mullah had performed
important social functions in traditional Pukhtun society but had never
been recognized as a ruler. After the Afghan revolution, however,
fundamentalism was encouraged as a counterpoise to communist ideology.
The material aid from the Middle East strengthened the trend., And as
Afghan nationalism was anathema to the establishment in Pakistan,
important sections of it gave important assistance to the fundamentalist
parties.  


What is the social base of fundamentalism in the Muslim world today?
Poverty and illiteracy, maintain some writers.  But is this the real
reason? If this were so, Pakistan should be the first stronghold of
fundamentalism because it is at the bottom of the list among Muslim
countries in these benchmarks, just above Sudan and Afghanistan. Iran,
where fundamentalism continues to thrive, had a per capita income of
$2,160 and a literacy rate of 48 per cent in 1977--  that is, on the eve
of the Iranian revolution--compared to $200 per capita income and a
literacy rate of 24 per cent for Pakistan that same year. Algeria, Egypt,
Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia and Indonesia have per capita incomes of $1,951,
$686, $551, $800, $884 and $560 respectively, and literacy rates of 46,
44, 58, 24, 62 and 64 per cent. Only Sudan and Afghanistan come near
Pakistan, with respective per capita incomes of $370 and $168 and
literacy rates of 20 and 10 per cent.  

In Muslim countries, it is clear, fundamentalism does not attract the
poor and uneducated alone. It appeals to a section of the educated youth
as well, who are drawn towards it as an alternative political system in
post-colonial societies ruled by corrupt and inefficient political elites
tied to the West.  Most of the Muslim countries suffered under colonial
rule and the masses expected a better dispensation after liberation from
the foreign yoke. They grew disillusioned, however, as decades after
liberation the people continued to suffer under the unscrupulous and
corrupt generals, bureaucrats and politicians.  In these countries, where
common people did not often have clean potable water to drink, the ruling
elite spent its ill-gotten wealth on costly luxuries imported from abroad
and on highly ostentatious living. Not only was this true of the ruling
elites tied to the bourgeois West but also of the nationalist or
socialist elites aligned with the former Soviet bloc.  

This negligence provided more than enough material to the
fundamentalists, who simultaneously condemned capitalism, nationalism and
socialism--along with the big and the small Satan supporting them. The
puritanical life style of many fundamentalist leaders along with their
stress on honesty and otherworldliness, has sometimes led people to think
that they would be able to end the corruption and dishonesty if they were
in power. 

What is the social base of fundamentalism in the Muslim world today? 
Most of the Muslim countries suffered under colonial rule and the masses
expected a better dispensation after liberation from the foreign yoke.
They grew disillusioned, however, as decades after liberation the people
continued to suffer under the unscrupulous and corrupt generals,
bureaucr... 




                               RIGHTS GUARANTEED                                                     
               
               Let's eyeball the Bill of Rights,  the first  10 amend-
          ments to the Constitution.
               Now we  will really see some fancy magic by the Cult of
          the Black  Robes.    Decision  after  decision  from federal
          courts across the United States magically become 'law'.  The
          Bill of  Rights bears  no resemblance  to the  way they were
          originally written.
               When ratifying  the Constitution, the states felt there
          were not enough restrictions on the power of the new central
          government.   They requested  that a Bill of Rights be added
          at the first opportunity.    Many  argued  that  no  bill of
          rights was  needed.  Alexander Hamilton said, "The truth is,
          after all the declamations we have heard, that the Constitu-
          tion is itself, in every rational sense, and to every useful
          purpose, A BILL OF RIGHTS." 
               Hamilton insisted there was nothing in the Constitution
          which would  allow the government to assume powers which the
          bill of rights sought to protect.   To  reduce the  fears of
          some of  the states,  the First  Congress proposed 12 amend-
          ments to the various states for ratification.

               Here is the preamble to the Bill of Rights as they were
          submitted:  "The  conventions  of  a  number  of the States,
          having at  the  time  of  their  adopting  the Constitution,
          expressed a  desire, in  order to prevent misconstruction or
          abuse of its powers,  that further  declaratory and restric-
          tive clauses  should be  added:  And as extending the ground
          of public confidence in the Government, will best ensure the
          beneficent ends of its institution. .  " 

               The  intent  of  the  First  Congress  when the Bill of
          Rights were assembled. . 'In order  to prevent  abuse of its
          powers, we  are going to include further restrictions on the
          central government  to promote  the general  welfare, make a
          more  perfect   union,  establish  justice  and  secure  the
          blessings of liberty.' 
               Every clause in the first ten amendments is  a restric-
          tion on  the government.  It's not how they interpret it nor
          how some judge decides it should apply . . . it's a restric-
          tion, period!
               The first  two of  the proposed  12 amendments were not
          ratified by the states.  The  first concerned representation
          in Congress  and the  second with  restricting Congress from
          raising its salary.  The first  eight amendments  are really
          specific restrictions  and the  last two cover any issue not
          covered in the first  eight.   The ninth  and tenth  are the
          ones government ignores the most.
               The First  Amendment prohibits  the restriction of your
          religious freedoms which we have already  covered in earlier
          sections.   It covers freedom of speech but if you speak out
          against sensitive issues, you'll be surprised  how fast they
          will shut you up.
               Many people were recently arrested for demonstrating in
          front of the Supreme Court, and in front of the  White House
          and Congress.  What about the farmers demonstrating in front
          of the Chicago Board of  Trade  or  people  involved  in the
          abortion issue?  Can we still peaceably assemble?  Today you
          are free to assemble when the government tells you it  is OK
          otherwise, you  will probably end up in jail.  The charge is
          generally 'criminal trespass'.  What?   Where did  they find
          that one?
               This  is  a  right  which  has been turned upside down.
          About par for the course, isn't it?   By what authority does
          government at any level ignore these restrictive clauses?
               The last  clause is the right to petition for a redress
          of grievances.  This  is one  which has  fallen into disuse.
          Do you feel you have a grievance against the government?  
               The  word  redress  means  to right a wrong, correct an
          error, remedy or relieve, to correct or reform.  Now  do you
          have  a  grievance  that  you  would like to have redressed?
          Submit a petition. 
               There is no specific  form to  use.   The 1st Amendment
          does not  specify to which branch of government the petition
          has to be sent.   Any  branch,  department,  section, court,
          commission,  etc.,  must  accept  your  petition.  They must
          answer and redress what you are complaining about.   This is
          a right every reader should exert!
               At  the  end  of  the  book,  you'll  find  a copy of a
          Petition For Redress of Grievances.  It's an  ASCII file and
          can be  printed out  on any  printer.  It includes the First
          Amendment to show  those  to  whom  you  are  directing your
          petition  that  you  know  the  amendment.   It gives them a
          chance to read it if they don't know what it says.  Print it
          then lay out your complaint in your own words. 
               The simpler  you explain  what you  want corrected, the
          less chance there is for any bureaucrat to misinterpret what
          you are  trying to get across.  Also cite whatever provision
          of the constitution you are showing has been violated.
               You might cite the full Ninth  and Tenth  Amendments to
          prove  that  the  persons  to  whom  you are addressing your
          petition have no authority to assume any powers not specifi-
          cally granted in the Constitution.
               If you are wrong, they will let you know in a hurry.  I
          wouldn't accept their answers at face  value but  check them
          out against my own interpretation of the Constitution and go
          after them again. 
               You are perfectly free to address  it to  anyone in the
          government,  be  it  your  own  representative, senator, the
          President or Vice-president, the  head  of  a  department, a
          judge, the  Supreme Court,  whomever!  Every bureaucrat with
          an ounce of so called power  in government  should receive a
          petition for redress. 
               A  likely  place  to  show  the people what answers are
          returned would  be to  write letters  to the  editors of any
          newspaper in the country.
               This Right to Petition for Redress is a tremendous tool
          for American citizens  which  has  not  been  used  for many
          years.   It is an area in the Bill of Rights with which they
          have no experience ignoring so we should make  extensive use
          of this right.  
               Now  the  Second  Amendment.    The  judicial branch of
          government,  our  protectors,   have   effectively  disarmed
          Americans! 
               Look  at  the  "gun  laws" which courts have upheld all
          over the country.    Our  'leaders'  have  decided  that you
          should not own a handgun, assault rifle or a machine gun for
          that matter.  What  gives them  the right  to decide  that? 
          Arms  are  defined  as  "Weapons,  especially firearms."  It
          doesn't say only firearms so where do they make the distinc-
          tion? 
               It's plain  that the  "right of  the people to keep and
          bear arms shall not  be infringed."   It  has nothing  to do
          with the militia!
               This  is  part  of  those  declaratory  and restrictive
          clauses added to prevent a misconstruction or abuse  of it's
          powers. 
               They can do nothing which will keep an American citizen
          from owning any weapon he or she desires.  It's that simple!
          This was a unique stance for any government to guarantee its
          citizens the right to own weapons.   Switzerland  is another
          which has such a guarantee. 
               Where does  it say that arms need to be registered?  No
          where!    This  is  part  of  the  prohibition  on Congress.
          Registration is  a dangerous  practice and  must be stopped.
          You don't have to look  too  far  into  history  to  see why
          government wants a list of owners of weapons . . . then it's
          no problem to visit everyone  on  the  list  and  demand the
          weapon be  turned in.   That  is while they hold a weapon on
          the owner.
               We have  had  presidents  shot  in  our  history, other
          people in government have been shot but the Second Amendment
          has stood firm. 
               Suddenly, in the early  sixties,  we  have  a president
          shot (under  circumstances that  suggest it was other than a
          plain  citizen),  then  his  brother  is  shot  and  now all
          Americans are dangerous and should no longer be able to buy,
          have or keep weapons.  Isn't that strange? 
               Why were the major gun laws passed in 1968 and not when
          other  presidents  were  killed?    Is this part of what the
          courts call "public policy" and the  Constitution be damned?
          It's a  policy to  get the  weapons away  from Americans for
          purposes other than some public official may be shot.
               You hear much talk about guns being authorized only for
          the militia  which is  gobbledygook.  Here are statements of
          several  states  when  they  ratified  the  Constitution and
          requested a  Bill of  Rights:   "The people  have a right to
          keep  and  bear  arms;    that  a  well  regulated  militia,
          including the body of the people CAPABLE OF BEARING ARMS, is
          the proper, natural and safe defence of a free State;".
          
               Notice the semicolon after  keep  and  bear  arms.  . .
          There  is  no  connection  of  that  statement  to  the well
          regulated militia.   These  are  two  complete  and separate
          statements.
               Perhaps they no longer want us to be a free State.
               The State  of New Hampshire was even more direct in its
          demand on the arms issue.  "Congress shall  never disarm any
          citizen unless such are or have been in rebellion." 
               The  people  of  those  times would have never given up
          their weapons whether they were a  member of  the militia or
          not!   The same  applies today.   No  one is forced to own a
          gun.  And no one has the right to tell  a citizen  he or she
          cannot own a gun whatever shape or form it may take.  
               Our  'leaders'  have  probably suddenly discovered that
          they bleed as we do.  They want to take away your weapons to
          reduce their  chance of  bleeding!  That is ridiculous also.
          The persons intent on doing bodily harm to  anyone will find
          a way  to get  the weapon  they need  regardless of what the
          government has to say about weapons.
               If everyone owned a weapon, whether  it be  a hand gun,
          rifle, shotgun  or even  a machine gun, there would be a lot
          less violence with weapons. 
               The two incidents recently, one in  New York  City, the
          other in  Chicago show that Americans have a right to defend
          themselves.   The public  and law  enforcement officials are
          solidly behind the idea that citizens have that right.  Some
          of the elected officials are not so happy about it. 
               So what is the purpose  of  gun  laws?    Simply people
          control.
               New York  City has  the first and strictest gun control
          law on the books and what good does it serve?  If people are
          intent on committing violence, they will use screwdrivers or
          baseball bats.  Are they going to outlaw  screwdrivers next?
          Nonsense.
               Look  at  Switzerland  .  .  . Every able bodied man is
          trained in weapons and issued a weapon to keep in  his home,
          ready always.   Switzerland has the lowest crime rate in the
          world.  There is a lesson there; gun control is an insult to
          the American people.
               Government spends  billions on all sorts of weapons but
          feels the citizen who has  a  constitutional  right  to have
          weapons is  not to  be trusted owning a handgun.  Is it just
          because they do it and the  "guardian of  our rights" decide
          they will rubber stamp it because it is 'public policy' now?
               How did a clause  designed to  be a  restriction on big
          brother  get  turned  around  to become a restriction on the
          people who delegated the right to be governed?
               Another recent issue in the area  of the  2nd Amendment
          shows the  contempt the  bureaucracy has  for us  . . bullet
          proof vests.  There is a proposal floating around that would
          outlaw anyone  except law  enforcement personnel from owning
          or wearing a bullet proof vest. 
               There will be exceptions to allow  our leaders  to wear
          one if  they desire.   They  just want  to make certain that
          
          they will not bleed but we will.  How about that?   
               How many people  would  go  through  the  expense  of a
          bullet proof  vest is  questionable.  Yet they have no right
          to "pass a law" saying we can't own one.  
               Every American citizen should  own at  least one weapon
          and know  how to  use it  proficiently.   Should an incident
          arise, you must be able to protect yourself  or family.   If
          you have  a weapon  and never  have to use it, what have you
          lost?  Nothing . . . and that is the point.
               Every time there  is  an  incident  involving  a weapon
          where several  people are shot or killed, idiots come out of
          the woodwork screaming for more gun control.   Yet some jerk
          can drive  an automobile  into a  crowd and kill five or six
          people.  No one says we should outlaw automobiles .  . . yet
          these people are as dead . . .
               Let me  point out now that we have gone through all the
          points on 'keeping and bearing arms'. . . I am  NOT a member
          of any gun club or NRA.  I just believe in our Constitution.
               The Third  Amendment is  one which is mainly the result
          of the Revolutionary War. .  "No soldier  shall be quartered
          in any  house. .   "  but this should be considered together
          with the  intent of  the 2nd  Amendment.   It reinforces the
          reason for  the 2nd.   I sincerely hope we never have to try
          to force the issue of soldiers in American homes through our
          kangaroo court system.
               "The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
          houses, papers,  and effects,  against unreasonable searches
          and seizures,  shall not  be violated. .  " and if you still
          believe that, I have a  piece  of  ocean  front  property in
          Arizona I want to sell.
               The people  of the  colonies had  a lot of trouble with
          searches and seizures which were conducted by the Kings men.
          They  used  "Writs  of  Assistance"  which  were papers they
          carried in their pockets.  They would simply fill out a name
          and hand  it to  the individual  and they had the 'right' to
          search their home. 
               There was no need to show "probable cause" or to  get a
          warrant  from  a  judicial  officer,  they  just  went  in a
          person's home and looked and took whatever they decided they
          wanted.  See the reason for the 4th Amendment?  
               Now the courts have decided that the police can stop an
          automobile, search it and seize  what  they  find  without a
          warrant.  The executive branch has been given 'authority' to
          go  to  your  bank  and  get  all  your  records  and papers
          (Internal  Revenue  Service)  without even letting you know.
          They can go to the telephone company and get all the records
          of your calls, etc. 
               Apparently  youngsters  in  school  are  not  people as
          defined in  the 4th  Amendment because  school officials can
          open a  locker and  search whenever they want.  Does the 4th
          Amendment say schools or school  kids  are  exempt  from the
          restriction? 
               People  who  are  only  accused  of  a 'crime' have had
          papers taken without search warrants and even had the papers
          
          confiscated without any authority in our Constitution.  Case
          after case the courts have watered down the Fourth Amendment
          until it is now practically nonexistent.  Why?
               More usurpation of the protections we are guaranteed in
          the pursuit of life, liberty and happiness.   We must assume
          control of our government!
               When we speak of the Fifth Amendment, most people think
          of "someone  invoking  the  Fifth"  or  refusing  to testify
          against himself.  (Judges have it even easier, all they have
          to say is it is frivolous.)  But  the Fifth  Amendment is an
          involved amendment and contains a bunch of guarantees.
               There are  many parts  to the  5th Amendment. . No  one
          shall be tried for the same crime twice. .  No one  shall be
          held  to  answer  for  a  capital  or  infamous crime except
          through a Grand Jury. .  No one is required to be  a witness
          against  himself.  .  .  Nor  can any citizen be deprived of
          life, liberty or property without due process of law. .  Nor
          can private  property be  taken for  public use without just
          compensation!  That's a load of protection for us.
               The 5th Amendment is more dead than the  4th Amendment.
          There are some judges who will not even allow the 5th Amend-
          ment to be mentioned in their  courtrooms.   Do you remember
          what their oath said? 
               All the  clauses of this amendment are important to our
          survival but the most important part  is:   "nor be deprived
          of life,  liberty, or property, without due process of law."
          This  about  covers  all  the  other  issues  of  the entire
          amendment.
               Now  courts  are  trying  to decide or demanding that a
          citizen define due process.  More judicial buffoonery!  What
          is  the  'law'?    First, our Constitution and secondly, all
          laws passed in conformance with the Constitution. 
               If your papers  are  seized  without  a  warrant parti-
          cularly  describing the papers to be seized, this is not due
          process.  Any reader can  figure  from  that  just  what due
          process is. 
               Did  you  agree  to  allow  our rights to be ignored or
          purposely violated?   If  we have  all these  rights and the
          entire government  must respect  and protect them, how could
          they possibly do their job?
               In the Sixth Amendment,  we  examine  the  rights  of a
          person who is accused of a crime.  The accused has the right
          to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury where the
          crime was to have been committed. 
               The accused  also has  the right  to be informed of the
          nature and cause of the crime he/she is  being charged with.
          Also to  be confronted  by the  witnesses against him.  They
          also have the right to have the government pay for witnesses
          if the  accused can't afford to pay to have them testify for
          him.   Further, they  have the  right to  have assistance of
          counsel for their defense.
               Most  of  this  amendment  has been turned around.  The
          speedy trial requirement has usually been  observed.  Public
          trial has  not.  There have been many instances where judges
          
          decide what  will be  made public  violating this amendment.
          They  claim  they  have  'discretion'  to decide that point.
          Where does this amendment allow for that discretion?
               An impartial jury is  a requirement  being ignored more
          and more.   Government  prosecutors have been known to check
          backgrounds  of  potential  jurors   through  computers  and
          eliminate those  who would  not be  favorable to their side.
          They deny this saying this could never happen in our system.
          But they don't always tell the truth as we have seen. 
               We spoke  earlier about  the necessity  of an impartial
          jury trying the law  as well  as the  supposed crime.   When
          pressed about  this, the  federales will admit that the jury
          has the  right to  try the  law also  but feel  they are not
          required to inform the jury of this fact. 
               It  is  most  important  that any accused person have a
          truly impartial jury as  required  by  this  amendment.   It
          should not  be necessary  for a person accused of a crime to
          have to try to prove that  the jury  was biased  in any way.
          This is  one of those sneaky points where the government can
          get away with handpicking the jury to assure a conviction. 
               If a jury is truly impartial, you should be able  to go
          out into  the street  and pick  the first  twelve people you
          meet to be jurors.  
               Having the  right to  be confronted  with the witnesses
          against him  is also by the wayside.  Now we have undercover
          agents who simply make an accusation and are  protected from
          appearing as required by this amendment. 
               Must protect their identity . . . they say.  What about
          this constitutional requirement?  
               The right to counsel has been  twisted out  of recogni-
          tion.    According  to  the  judges and courts, when it says
          counsel, it means attorney or lawyer. 
               But it  doesn't  say  that.    Counsel  has  never been
          defined  as  an  attorney.    Judges  and  attorneys are all
          members of the same  fraternity.    They  have  decided that
          counsel means attorney to keep their friends working.
               Why  should  it  matter  to  a  court  if  you  have an
          attorney?  They require an attorney because attorneys  are a
          member  of  the  court.    The  courts  will  then force the
          attorney to follow their rules and sacrifice your  rights in
          order not  to upset the judge or court.  If you were accused
          of a crime and you knew a person who was not an attorney but
          was well  versed in  law, you have the right under the Sixth
          Amendment to have him assist you in your defense. 
               Judges enjoy amending  the  Constitution  and  you will
          have  a  fight  on  your  hands to insist that this right be
          respected.  But,  what  is  a  little  fight  with  a public
          servant?    Remember  .  .  .  the judicial branch considers
          rights as fighting words.
               The Seventh Amendment assures the right to a jury trial
          in a  civil case  according to  the practice  of common law.
          Common law practice came to this country from  Great Britain
          and was  used throughout  the original  thirteen colonies at
          the time the Constitution was adopted.  For  a good explana-
          
          tion of common law, purchase a copy of The Federalist Papers
          and read paper #83 by Alexander Hamilton.
               The right to a  trial by  jury in  a criminal  case has
          already been  guaranteed in  the basic  document.  Neverthe-
          less, the states wanted this further restriction.  The right
          in  a  civil  case  where  the  value in controversy exceeds
          twenty dollars shall be preserved.  The case  could be tried
          before a  judge alone  but only  if the  parties in the suit
          agree to waive the jury. 
               This also means that  each  citizen  is  guaranteed the
          right to  demand a  jury trial  anytime they are assessed by
          big brother, whether it be a  fine or  an assessment  by the
          Internal Revenue  Service.   That any  controversy where the
          value exceeds twenty dollars, you have the right  under this
          amendment  to  demand  that  the  fact  be  tried  before an
          impartial jury.   This  was included  to prevent overzealous
          actions by the central government and their agents.
               The  Eighth   Amendment  forbids  the  government  from
          demanding excessive bail  where,  considering  the financial
          circumstances of  the individual,  the government could keep
          someone in jail for an indefinite period where  the needs of
          justice would not be served.
               It's obvious  that this practice has been turned around
          because judges will decide that they want to hold someone in
          jail and  set excessive  bail requirements.  There again, we
          find judges amending the Constitution violating Article V of
          the basic  document.  They have decided . . . It's as simple
          as that!
               The men who wrote  the  Constitution  and  the  Bill of
          Rights knew  they could  not cover  all the  events and cir-
          cumstances that might happen in the future so  they included
          two more amendments as "catch-alls." 
               The  Ninth  and  Tenth  Amendments.    The  first eight
          amendments were abuses which  the  colonists  suffered under
          British  Royal  rule  and  were  spelled out as prohibitions
          against the national  government.    Now  to  make  sure the
          government was  kept inside  the fence  of delegated powers,
          they included the Ninth Amendment. 
               It reads as follows:  "THE ENUMERATION IN THE CONSTITU-
          TION, OF  CERTAIN RIGHTS,  SHALL NOT BE CONSTRUED TO DENY OR
          DISPARAGE OTHERS RETAINED BY THE PEOPLE."   The  Ninth makes
          it unmistakably  clear that  the government cannot and could
          not  interfere  with any  rights which  the people retained.    
          These  include  an endless list of things not spelled out in
          the first eight amendments.  A citizen has  the right  to do
          or not  do whatever  he or she pleases as long as the rights
          of others are not violated.  Of course those choices must be
          in keeping  with the  JUST laws  which conform  with and are
          passed in pursuance of the Constitution.
               Now let's again take a look at what the Tenth Amendment
          spells out:   "THE POWERS NOT DELEGATED TO THE UNITED STATES
          BY THE CONSTITUTION NOR PROHIBITED BY IT TO  THE STATES, ARE
          RESERVED TO THE STATES RESPECTIVELY OR TO THE PEOPLE."
               How  do  they  get  away with police powers, making any
          
          thing but gold and silver coin as tender, allowing a private
          corporation  control  the  value  of our money, establishing
          crimes, etc?  These two amendments simply point out what was
          true  .  .  .  That  the new government was one of specific,
          limited, enumerated powers delegated by us.  
               Have they faithfully  observed  these  amendments?   Of
          course not.   Now  you can  see why  the national government
          ignores these two amendments.    They  show  absolutely that
          they are forbidden from doing anything which was not spelled
          out.
               These two amendments are  the 'yardsticks'  by which we
          can  judge  whether  any  branch  of  government,  be it the
          legislative,  executive  or  judicial,   is  exceeding  it's
          authority.  Is our Constitution dead?  It's up to you.
               Let's read in part what the Declaration of Independence
          says about rights being violated:    "That  to  secure these
          rights,  governments  are  instituted  among  men.  .  That,
          whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these
          ends, it  is the right of the people to alter or abolish it,
          and to institute a new government. .  [when we are forced to
          suffer] a  long train  of abuses  and usurpations.  .  It is
          their right, it is their duty,  to throw  off such   govern-
          ment, and to provide new guards for their security." 
               Our  government,  under  constitutional  standards, has
          only three  functions.  They are (1)  DELIVER OUR  MAIL, (2)
          DEFEND OUR  SHORES and  (3) STAY  THE HELL OUT OF OUR LIVES!
          There is nothing further!  They have NO OTHER POWER.


                  REGISTRATION DETAILS COMING UP ....

                     THANKS FOR YOUR SUPPORT ....
    
                     1. EARLY DAYS AND IDEAS

     Sometimes I find myself thinking wistfully of the days when I
was young and sure of myself and my future, when I thought the
solid ground under my feet was a foundation for an air castle and
when right and wrong were very definite things, and black was black
and white was white and I would have nothing to do with gray.

     I had no such regrets, of course, when first I gloated
childishly over the neat little black and gold sign that announced
to the world that Martin Avery was a doctor of medicine and ready
to practice. I admired my small library of medical textbooks, my
shiny surgical instruments and I repeated over and over the
sonorous words of the oath I had taken. Much has happened to me
since then, much that I somehow feel compelled to put on paper.
Perhaps even after these years I want to prove that in my way I
have tried to be faithful to my youthful ideas.

     So this is a human-interest document designed to show troubled
women that they have companions in distress, I shall not clutter it
up with medical terms. I have no patience with doctors who think
they must sprinkle Latin in every sentence and generally talk as
though they were dictating a highly technical article for a medical
journal. I am not trying to be impressive nor am I trying to
preach. This book might be called "Sidelights on Tragedy." If it
will make a few less persons look disdainful or horrified at the
word "abortion," I will have succeeded in my purpose.

     I must have been a somewhat priggish Sir Galahad when I was
graduated from medical school. I saw myself curing the world of
nice, respectable diseases like measles and smallpox and perhaps
halting epidemics by quickness of thought or saving a rich man's
life by my miraculous skill as a surgeon.

     I had lived a fairly clean life, almost unbelievably clean it
seems to me now. But then I never had much money. My people were
farmers. That accounted for part of my pride. I thought Myself
mighty smart to be going up a rung in the ladder, from peasant to
professional man. Sometimes I thought it would be nice if I had a 

                         
                  
                               1

                

physician father to take me in with him and a long line of medical
ancestor's to give me an honorable tradition. But at the same time 
my egotism fed itself on the thought that I was the first of my
family to have guts and ambition and brains enough to escape the
soil for a white-collar profession.

     I liked to hear my mother refer proudly to "My son, the
doctor," and I liked to strut around in front of the neighbors. To
be sure, the white collar and the shiny instruments and even the
neat little office were mortgaged to my father, whose dirt-
encrusted hands had earned the money that sent me through school.
But I had visions of grateful patients showering me with gold. I
was an idealist in those days and I had plenty of illusions, too.

     The sad thing about my office was that it stayed empty as did
likewise my purse. I angled after connections as hotel physician,
and I tried to get a job as a city clinic doctor; but I had no
political pull, and, being a farm boy, no influence in any other
lines. Most of my few patients had little money and came to me
because they believed I would be cheap.

     So for a while I pursued my honorable profession by lancing a
few boils, prescribing for a few bad hangovers, treating a child
for a nail wound, issuing headache pills to a woman who went from
doctor to doctor seeking an audience for her complaints and dishing
out enough medicine for common colds to stock a drug store. I was
so anxious to display all my knowledge that I went in for complete
examinations no matter how trifling the complaint, tried to look
wise, clucked thoughtfully and shook my head.

     At times I wished to high heaven that I lived in England,
where I could buy a steady practice and not have to sit in my
office reading and re-reading medical journal's and wondering if
I'd soon lose any surgical skill I possessed for lack of practice.

     It amuses me now to recall how I felt when I first treated a
house girl who had gonorrhea. I treated the girl, and then gave her
a lecture in which, as I recall, I told her that because of my oath
I would protect her secret but that she was running a horrible
risk. I know now that she must have been choking with laughter, but
at the time I thought that she was mightily impressed. And I felt
quite the man of the world. In fact, I made up some impressive --
to me -- thoughts about how my profession brought me in contact
with the dregs of the world and how it was up to me to maintain my
purity of thought in spite of all the depravity I was forced to
see. I meant to deliver these noble sentiments to a pure sweet girl
whenever my practice grew enough that I could afford to seek this
marvelous woman who would be chosen as my wife.

     I still had this holier-than-thou attitude when a very pretty
blonde came to see me. She looked like a "nice girl," and this
shocked me all the more when she told me, in a frightened way, that
she was "caught" and she wanted an abortion. Her father was dead,
and she lived with her mother and her brother, a prominent
businessman in the town. I had heard of the girl as a well-known
college student and a gay member of the younger set. She was not a
social luminary, but she was a class ahead of me.


                         
                  
                               2

                

     I made the finger examination and there was no doubt that she
was pregnant -- about two months along. She wanted a
"prescription," she said. She was ignorant about such things, but
a friend had told her that for a few dollars she could buy some
medicine that would cause a miscarriage.

     It seems odd to realize that I was shocked about this. I had
heard of girls who were "knocked up" and did something about it.
There had been plenty of such gossip in the farming community where
I had lived, and I'd heard methods of causing crude abortions
discussed among the medical students. In fact, I knew one medical
student who worked his way through his senior year as an
abortionist among the lower classes of the university town. He had
told me something about the method he had used, but I had paid
little attention and had disapproved of the whole business.

     I was stern and righteous with this girl and asked her why she
did not marry the man.

     She burst into tears. "I can't," she said.

     "Is he married?" I asked.

     She shook her head.

     "Engaged to another man?" I asked. Those were the only two
reasons that my mid-Victorian mind could conceive why any man would
refuse to marry her.

     "No," she said, "but he says that it is my fault. And I guess
it is. He asked me if I were doing anything about this, and I
suppose I was a fool, for I said that I was. I didn't know anything
to do. I asked a girl I know, and she told me to take a douche
anytime within 24 hours."

     Dumb as I was, I was shocked at this ignorance. Bit by bit she
unfolded a story that was new and pitiful to me then but which I
have heard so often since that I can supply it before the girl
opens her mouth.

     Katherine, as I shall call her, had fallen in love with a man
about seven years older than herself, a bachelor businessman. She
had gone absolutely crazy about him.

     The man was the sort who likes sexual freedom and gets panicky
at the thought of marriage. He had given Katherine a big rush, for,
of all reasons, her look of wholesomeness. He had said that she had
a "wholesome attitude" toward sex. As a matter of fact, she was too
deeply infatuated to have any definite attitude except to agree
with everything he said. A man's idea of a wholesome attitude
toward sex usually is one that leaves him absolutely free, while a
woman's idea is one that leads inevitably toward marriage.

     Because she wanted to appear worldly-wise, she denied being a
virgin. I was astounded to hear that, but I learned afterward that
a great many young girls do the same thing. Frequently they
themselves cannot explain why. Almost invariably, it is when they 


                         
                  
                               3

                

are having affairs with older men. They seem to believe that the
man will wonder why they have not had affairs before and will think
less of them. So they try to disguise their awkwardness and
ignorance; and since many athletic girls do not have hymens, the
man does not find it out.

     Katherine had talked vaguely about an imaginary previous
affair. She seemed to think that it would make her more interesting
if the man believed she was sexually experienced and had been
desired before. "A lot of men had made overtures to me," she told
me. "but I had managed to evade them. I knew that Don had had a lot
of affairs and told him some lies so he wouldn't think I was quite
so dumb."

     This, of course, released the man from any feeling of
responsibility and had also made him think that she knew about
contraceptives and could take care of herself. And she was too
inexperienced to know whether he was protecting her. It was an
example of the dangers of innocence and where ignorance was not
bliss.

     Naturally, when she did not insist that the man use
contraceptives, he omitted them. She told me that when she learned
she was pregnant, she had explained the situation to him and he had
advised her to go to a doctor. But I think now that she lied. A lot
of girls are overwhelmed with false modesty in such circumstances
and will go instead to girls as inexperienced as they are. Having
pretended to be worldly-wise, they are caught in a web of their own
lies.

     This girl was not as stupid as she seems in this narrative.
She had sense enough to realize just what type of man she loved.
Apparently he had made it plain that he did not intend to marry her
and he expected her to take her full share of the responsibility in
this affair. She couldn't tell her mother because mother was the
type who would "rather See her daughter in her grave" than have an
abortion and she probably would try to force the man into a shotgun
marriage. Katherine was sensible enough to see that the man would
evade this, or if he married her, would hate her for the trick.
Too, since she had lied to him about her virginity, she had thrown
away that hold.

     So she had gone to a girl friend and the girl had said
something about a mysterious medicine that would cause her to
resume menstruation. Then she had come to me, for, of all reasons,
the fact that she did not know me and I was new in town. She did
not want to go to her family doctor or any physician whom she knew.

     It was a case of the blind going to the blind. I was horrified
and told her that, of course, I could not perform an abortion I had
heard about some of the drastic medicines given in such cases and
I warned her against them. I told her that I could go to prison for
doing what she wanted, and I was against such things personally. I
probably sounded fierce, for I was afraid someone would find out
that she'd been to me with such a request, and I feared even that
would get me into trouble.



                         
                  
                               4

                

     She left me a great deal more frightened than when she
arrived. I had told her that no decent doctor would perform an
abortion. And I had scared her pretty badly about using any home
devices. Also I'd added a little homily on her 'sins. I should have
been shot, but I felt righteous about the whole business. She had
some money. She'd been teaching school and saved several hundred
dollars and she offered me the whole sum if I would get her out of
the jam. I needed the money, but I felt a virtuous glow over
turning it down. I was living up to medical ethics. I was being a
good citizen and an honorable physician.

     So she went away, and I settled back in my empty office and
read medical journals and old magazines and treated a few persons
who came in with colds and indigestion.

     The next day her name leaped at me from the front page of the
daily newspaper. Her body had been found on the doorstep of her
home, at one o'clock that morning, by her brother as he was
returning from a dance. She had shot herself, and she died in the
ambulance on the way to, the hospital.

     The newspaper account said she had resigned her position as a
teacher because of a nervous breakdown culminating when she fainted
in the class room. Her relatives had noticed that she seemed very
nervous, refused to eat and was unable to sleep at night. They had
tried, without success, to arouse her interest in social life. She
had left no note -- just gone out in the yard and shot herself with
her brother's revolver.

     There followed several paragraphs telling how prominent and
popular she had been in school, how she had a promising future as
a teacher. Her family was. grief-stricken.

     It shook me pretty badly. I tried to console myself by saying
that she had not threatened suicide to me, that I was within my
rights, in refusing to help her, and it was unfair of her to ask me
to risk my future by performing an illegal operation.

     But I kept seeing that description of her. "She was a pretty
blonde girl. College mates described her as always being full of
fun and active in all school enterprises." She had belonged to
several clubs. I wondered which sorority sister had advised her to
"get a prescription."

     I wondered how her lover felt. I was filled with sudden hatred
for him, taking this young girl easily and selfishly and ruining
her life, talking to her glibly about her "wholesome attitude
toward sex." Now she was dead, and innuendoes would be whispered
about her nervous condition and her fainting spells and her lack of
appetite and her insomnia. Her relatives would feel bad about it.
It might even ruin their lives, too. Of course, her puritanical
relatives were partly to blame. Had they been more tolerant, they
would have helped her. It was her own fault, too, for being so
careless. She had trusted people and life too much. She had been
too confident in the decency of others.




                         
                  
                               5

                

     In the back of my head there was a nagging thought that I,
too, was to blame. I might have found someone else to help her. I
might have made arrangements. I was not so stupid that I did not
know of a doctor whose legitimate practice was small but who, drove
around in a big car with a chauffeur and had plenty of money. It
was common talk that he did a lot of illegal operations. He was a
pretty good surgeon, too.

     It was all a mess, and I resented being dragged into it, and
being made to feel guilty over the death of a strange girl.


                      II. MY FAMILY SPEAKS

     I went out in the country to see my family every Sunday. This
meant that I got a good meal and my depressed spirits were helped
by my mother's soothing prediction that soon her boy's practice
would pick up.

     The next Sunday the conversation happened to turn to the
suicide of Katherine J--.

     "The poor girl," my mother said. "Sounds like she was in the
family way."

     She clucked her tongue sympathetically. "I wish you had seen
her," she said. "If she'd come to you, you could have sent her to
old Ma Gooding, the one folks call Feather Sally, because she uses
a goose feather. Lots of good doctor's send patients to Feather
Sally, and she's never lost a one. Good money she makes, too."

     I was shocked.

     "She did come to me," I said indignantly, "waving her money in
my face as if I were a quack she could buy with a few hundred
dollars. But I refused to have anything to do with it. That's a
prison offense."

     My mother looked at me queerly. "And it's no prison offense to
drive a girl to suicide?" she asked.

     "It was her own lookout," I said, "She couldn't expect me to
risk my future with a criminal operation in order to get her out of
a jam."

     "If you keep on turning down hundred-dollar fees, it doesn't
look as if you're going to have much future," my father said dryly.
"The drought hit us pretty bad son, and we're needing money out
here, too. Doesn't pay to be too choosy about how you earn it. Old
Doc Kennedy over at Clear Creek makes plenty of money that way.
Specializes in it. You'd be surprised to know the names of some of
his patients, too."

     I felt like a badgered animal. It was not until years later
that I realized that only youth is moral in the accepted way. Youth
judges more severely and expects more rigid living up to standards.
Old age is more tolerant; it has learned to compromise and give
only lip-service to awkward convention.

                         
                  
                               6

                

     And like most youths I had the idea that my parents were very
strict. It was a shock, now that they had admitted me to adulthood,
to learn some of their views.

     "Folks call it murder," sniffed my mother. "Ain't hardly
nothing more'n a germ at first. Ain't no more murder than doin'
something aforehand to keep from having children. As far as that
goes, it ain't really no more murder than bein' an old maid and not
havin' nothin' to do with man at all. If you want to argue, you can
always say that every woman could bear a child, and it's murder if
She don't do it. Talk about the child's right to be born! The child
ain't saying nothin' about it. How do all these preacher's know the
child wants to be born. I've seen some cases where if the child
knew what was coming to him afterward he wouldn't want to be born.
Her voice softened. "Poor unwanted little mites. No money and no
name and not much chance in the world."

     "It was a case of professional ethics, mother," I said. "Of
course, quack doctors do a lot of underhanded business. And
probably they risk the girl's life by crude methods. But good
doctors avoid such things."

     "Maybe," 'sniffed my mother.

     "Some of these days the laws may be changed," I said, "and
birth-control methods and abortions may be legalized. But until
then, I must obey my oath and abide by the medical code."

     This did not impress my parents. Country people are not much
in favor of laws. Laws to them mean disagreeable taxes, game laws
which preserve the quail and ducks for the benefit of city folks
who swarm over the land, shooting at everything that appears on the
horizon, foreclosing of mortgages and other unpleasant
interferences with their lives.

     "Human beings come before laws," my mother said. "Some of
these laws are made by folks who want to kick others in the gutter
so's to make themselves seem higher up. I ain't never had no use
for such folks. Pull themselves up by pushing others down. I've
known some mighty good women who had convenient miscarriages and
women who were in trouble and later on made fine marriages and good
wives."

     She sighed. "If I'd known that poor girl, maybe I could have
told her something to do. They're more ways of killing a cat than
choking it with butter."

     My father laughed. "Ma could tell her," he said. "She'd have
had her jumping off porches and riding houses and merry-go-rounds
and climbing up and down stairs and taking hot baths and purgatives
and God knows what all."

     My mother smiled. "That's all right for you," she said. "Many
a time you've been thankful I wasn't so green."





                         
                  
                               7

                

     "I never could stand to see a poor young girl bringin' a
fatherless babe into the world," my mother went on. "Of course, 
sometimes they love the children just as much as if they were born
in wedlock and sometimes they make good marriages later on. But the
run of folks are hard on them, and it's bad trying to live down
your mistakes."

     My father, however, was more upset by the idea that I had let
a hundred or so dollars slip out of my hands because of ethics.

     "It's dangerous," I said. "Suppose I'd done a bad job and
she'd died because of the operation. Her folks would claim that I
murdered her."

     "She killed herself anyhow, didn't she?" my father said.
"Looks to me like it's six of one and a half-dozen of the other."

     It was a relief for me to get back to my bare room in a cheap
Lodging house in the city. My pleased glow of virtue had departed,
and I remembered the boy who had worked his way through school with
abortions and a young interne who frankly had announced that he
meant to specialize in illegal operations.

     "They're the easiest way for a young doctor to get started,"
he had said. "And they're no more dangerous than, performing any
other operations. I'll wait until I get a little money saved and
then I'll be respectable. It takes money to be high and mighty."

     Some nagging prick of conscience forced me to go to Katherine
J's funeral. I eyed her weeping relatives with scorn. A little of
the love they were parading in public would have saved the girl's
life if they had exercised it in private. Some of the money that
went into the flower's, the elaborate coffin, the big monument,
could have sent the girl away on a "vacation" and brought her back
whole in body, and presently her heart would be healed. Later on,
I was to learn that while broken hearts cannot be cured by a
doctor, a little surgical or medical aid for the by-products helps
along a lot.

     Since then I've seen many girls, who were as tragic in speech
as Katherine, laugh about the whole episode a year later. By then
they had put it down as a valuable lesson and forgotten the horror
and fear they first felt.

     After the funeral, I drifted into a coffee shop and
encountered a doctor I admired.

     "You look low," he remarked.

     "I've been to a funeral," I said, and gave the girl's name.

     He nodded. "Nasty business. I suppose it's the old story."
"Yes," I looked at him. "I guess you see plenty of them," I went
on.





                         
                  
                               8

                

     "Not so many now," he said. "I get about two patients a year
who want abortions. I got more of them when I first started to 
practice. I guess they thought that, being a young doctor, I'd need
the money. But luckily I made money from the start. I had plenty of
friends, and so I didn't need to take the risk."

     "What do you do about the ones who come to you now?" I blurted
out.

     He gave me a keen glance. "Give them an examination and tell
them whether they're really pregnant. Chances are they're only
delayed by something. Up until three months, it's not easy to tell,
especially with the finger examination."

     This, it might be added, was before the rabbit test was widely
used. Nowadays it is possible to tell immediately by injecting
urine, into the rabbit and examining its ovaries 36 hour's later.

     "Then," the doctor went on, "I say nothing more unless the
Patient obviously is ignorant of anything to do, I may drop a hint
about the proper doctor to go to. Usually I don't do this, because
most people have ways of finding that out for themselves. However,
of course you know that some doctors make a good deal of money with
such recommendations and split fees. If I do drop a hint, I make
sure that I can trust the doctor."

     "It's a problem," I said frankly, "I've been wondering what to
do about such business. People come to me for medical aid and I
have to refuse treatment. We are permitted to treat venereal
diseases and we can be called in after miscarriage --"

     He grinned. "Of course. You know the stock alibi. You were
called in, and it was obvious that something had been done to cause
a partial abortion and your aid was needed to save the girl's life.
As soon as the uterus is punctured or the fetus is expelled, the
abortion is a fact. No one can prove anything against you as long
as you and the patient keep mum."

     "Understand," he went on. "I'm not taking sides. I'm not the
type of doctor that crusades for birth-control legislation. A
successful doctor -- of my variety -- can't afford to. I admire the
kind of doctor who does -- but he usually doesn't make any money.
Whenever anyone asks me, I give them what birth-control data I can,
which isn't much. Anyhow, they probably won't follow instructions."

     "Maybe the laws will be changed," I suggested.

     "I'm not very hopeful about legislative reform," he said. "In
my opinion, the whole business will work out for itself.
Information will be spread more widely. To me, it seem's better to
send a girl to a good surgeon than to let her get an infection by
going to a quack or trying some crude home method. I knew one poor
girl whose sweetheart kicked her in the abdomen and almost killed
her."

     "Of course," I said weakly. "It's the women's fault."



                         
                  
                               9

                

     "I blame the men more. Some of these men are just like
animals. They don't give a damn what happens to the woman. They may
know all about contraceptives; but they don't want to use them, and
some of them think it's fun to fool the woman. But even those men
aren't so bad as the ones who carry disease and won't warn the girl
or take any precautions. A girl may escape pregnancy but she'll
probably get a dose. I'd Like to see all venereal-disease carriers
quarantined or branded. And if they're incurable, they ought to be
sterilized or shut up."

     I grinned to myself. The doctor, in spite of his suave
exterior, was like all good doctors, a bit of a crusader when you
got him on his pet subject.

     "They send habitual criminals to prison," he went on. "But a
man can get dose after dose of a disease and remain at large. He's
just as dangerous, if not more so, to the community than a habitual
burglar. He's worse, in my opinion. A burglar only rob's people
who've got plenty of dough. But a man probably will give a dose to
some poor dumb girl who hasn't sense or money enough to get proper
treatment, and she may die or be ruined for life. Reformers talk
about sterilization of criminals and the insane, but I'm in favor
of sterilization of any man who's had a disease more than twice. A
man can get a dose once without really being to blame. But if he's
got any sense, he takes care of himself after that."

     He seemed to weary of the subject then, and I went home a
mighty thoughtful young doctor. I'd been so busy passing exams and
skimping along on my allowance that I'd never gone in for many bull
session's. Anyhow, a lot of the stuff that we talked at medical
school seemed haywire now. I'd gone around with a bunch of young
idealists who talked about being second Pasteur's and great
surgeons and doing good for humanity and in the back of my mind I'd
always seen myself saving a millionaire's life and bringing young
beauties back from sure death by tuberculosis.

     But I was getting rid of my fancy ideas mighty fast.


                       III. I TAKE A CASE

     Two or three days after my talk with the old doctor, a well
dressed man came into my office.

     "There'll be a girl up here pretty soon for treatment for
gonorrhea," he said bluntly. "I'm paying for it. She's a dumb cluck
who got mixed up with one of my employees. He won't pay for it, but
something had to be done for the girl, and I told her I'd have her
cured if she wouldn't see him again.' You fix her up and send me
the bill. I don't want to give the girl the money because she might
spend it on something else or quit after one treatment. See that
she's clean, but if she comes back with another dose I won't be
responsible for any more bills."

     He gave me his card and the girl's name. He was managing
editor of one of the local newspapers.



                         
                  
                               10

                

     "See if you can get any sense into her head," he added. "I
don't want any more trouble with her."

     He went out then, looking irritated, and I grinned. I figured
it was one of those "A-friend-of-mine" stories in which the
personal pronoun is soon brought into play. I wondered a little why
he told such a clumsy lie.

     But when the girl came in, half-frightened, half-angry, I
learned his story was the truth.

     One of the reporters had seduced the girl, whom I shall call
June. She was a pretty business-college student, dumb but
attractive in a virginal fashion. It may have been that very docile
innocence that attracted the man. He played around with a
sophisticated, hard-drinking crowd and it probably was, amusing to
find a girl who didn't know the ropes, didn't drink, didn't smoke,

     June, on the other hand, had heard about Jim, the reporter,
and she was fascinated by his reputation as a dapper man-about-
town. Jim was a handsome and entertaining scoundrel. He said that
he did not know she was a virgin until he had already started the
sex act. This may have been true, but it did not stop him then.

     Afterward, he either was conscience-stricken or decided that
it was dangerous to play around with her. Innocence may be
dangerous not only to the girl but to the man. At any rate, he did
not see her for about a month.

     But June was seized by the crazy infatuation which many young
girls feel for their first lovers. She telephoned Jim, she wrote
him notes asking why he was angry with her, what had she done? She
wept. She reminded him that, although a virgin, she had gone to bed
with him.

     Jim told his boas that he firmly intended to stay away from
June. Whether he was deeply attracted and some remnants of chivalry
motivated his refusal to see her or whether she bored him, I don't
know. But in the meantime he had been playing around with girls
equally dumb but not so innocent, and he got gonorrhea. He was
forced to tell his wife and to refrain from any intercourse with
her. But apparently his scruples did not apply to the young girl he
had seduced, for he went back to her. She got the disease and the
whole thing began again with the girl pursuing the reporter and
asking for medical treatment. The badgered newsman had gone to his
editor for sympathy.

     But his editor cursed him and told him to do something to keep
June from calling the office and coming down to the newsroom. Jim
refused, saying that he didn't have the money and anyhow the girl
had been with plenty of other men since he first seduced her.
Whether this was true, I do not know. It may have been. Frequently
girls who have just lost their virginity become promiscuous if
their first lovers desert them.





                         
                  
                               11

                

     Such girls seem to feel that since, they have lost their much-
guarded chastity it doesn't make much difference what they do and 
they weakly succumb to any man who comes along. It takes some time
for the girls to recover their emotional balance and become
discriminating. June denied that she had been with any other men.
And Jim admitted that he was diseased when he was with her.

     So the editor went to June and agreed to pay for her
treatments if she would promise never to see any of his reporters
again. She was grateful but at the same time she was a little
indignant about it. The editor had not minced words in describing
her lover, and she resented being forced to face the fact that
there was no romance in her seduction. She wanted the treatments,
but at the same time she would have liked to save her vanity.

     Since then, I have noticed the same traits in many girls. They
will try to find excuses for their first lovers, and say that it
"wasn't all his fault." They generally have remarkably few
illusion's about later lovers, but they want a little glamour over
the first affair.

     One intelligent girl talked to me about it. "It's a matter of
vanity for women to lie to themselves about their sweethearts," she
remarked. "The worst thing about breaking up an affair is that I
finally have to admit to myself that I have been kidding myself all
along. You see, I know that I am only an average girl and therefore
will attract only an average man. I know there are exceptions, and
sometimes you see a fine man absolutely crazy about a very
commonplace girl. But I, of course, have an ideal man in mind.
Whenever a man falls in love with me, I try to see my ideal
characteristics in him and I exaggerate those I do find. I try to
convince myself and my friends that he's a better man than he is.
When we break up, I have to see him as himself. That hurts, because
it shows me that I'm not attractive enough to get the sort of man
I want and hold him."

     But to go back to June. I sent my bill in to the editor and he
paid it promptly. June's spirits grew better as her cure
progressed. This time I gave no lecture on morals. Instead I tried
to teach her a few principles of hygiene.

     "Listen," I said, when I had pronounced her cured, "there is
no Santa Claus in this sex business, even if your case does look
like it. You were darned lucky. There are not many men who would do
for you what this editor did. It wasn't for the good of his soul,
either. He couldn't afford to have one of his men in a jam. So
don't go around expecting good Samaritans to yank you out of the
gutter. And don't try to get out of your class. You thought it was
romantic to have a love affair with a social butterfly, a dashing
columnist. But look what happened. A stranger got you out of your
jam. He did it because you were making a nuisance of yourself. If
you'd been in this guy's class, he would have taken more
precautions. He didn't give his wife a dose, but he figured you
didn't count. And to him you didn't. So you play in your own back
yard."




                         
                  
                               12

                

     She nodded. Later she married a clerk and they have three or
four kids. I don't know whither she ever told him about her first
affair. If she was smart, she didn't.

     The editor was pleased, because she kept away from his men And
two or three weeks later he sent me an abortion. This time didn't
quibble, I did it.

                   IV. WHY I AM AN ABORTIONIST

     Since then I've performed hundreds of abortions and when I did
all the work I've had no fatalities. Of course, I've been called in
on bungled jobs when it was too late; there was infection or a
hemorrhage and death was a matter of hours.

     I have changed from the surgical operation, in which the womb
was scraped, to use of heat, bacteria and exercise to cause a
natural premature birth with very little danger. I discarded the
finger test for the rabbit test of pregnancy. My prices went up as
the danger went down.

     I don't regret the fact that I have risked prison terms
constantly. As I went up the financial scale, I tried to use more
discrimination and to work for the sake of humanity. I have refused
to abort young society women who merely wanted to save their
figures, who shrank from the responsibilities of children. I have
turned away young women who could afford to marry and who I felt,
should mate legally and carry on the race. I have seen women whom
I felt needed children to make their lives fuller and who were
merely lazy or afraid of pain. And I have performed operations
later regretted by the women when they wanted children and for some
reason could not have them. That has made me more careful.

     I am not bragging that I really made the world better. I am an
older man now and a little tired and a bit inclined to be cynical.
Perhaps all these things would have worked out anyhow. But I
believe that I have saved valuable members of the race from
disgrace or from suicide, that I have kept families from being
wrecked. And I have not had a repeat case in years,

     The reformers argue that we must pay for our sins. But I do
not know that I agree with their definition of sin. There are times
when our instincts are too strong for us. There are accidents.
There are many cases in which it does not seem to me that I should
judge. I do not believe in populating the world with unwanted
children. I do not like to see the women suffer when the man
escapes without even blame. If there is some disease or some taint
of insanity, I do not believe in allowing the child to be born. And
if the birth of the child is going to wreck even one adult life, it
seems to me kinder to stop it. The people who yell "child murder"
have almost invariably never been faced with the problem.

     Criminologists say that crime is caused by children being born
into families where they have no opportunity for proper upbringing.
The children turn to stealing to get money for luxuries, even
necessities. They run in the streets because they have no
playgrounds. Their minds are warped in childhood. I believe it to 


                         
                  
                               13

                

be an act of crime prevention to halt any such children coming into
the world with the stigma of illegitimacy and a mother who is going
to have a much harder time making a living after the child is born.

     I am always irritated when I hear politicians talk about as
being the only land of equal opportunity. It isn't. Illegitimate
children had far better chances in the medieval days when "natural"
sons and daughters were the "natural" thing.

     I have never been in favor of forced marriages. In this
complex world the married couple starts out with enough problems
without being handicapped by an unwanted child and probably
unwanted mates.

     A great many cases have been like that of poor June, who fell
in love with a married man of a class slightly superior to her own.
Had she been slightly above him socially, the chances are that the
man would have obtained a divorce and married her. At least he
would have given her much better treatment. I get many girls who
have had affairs with their employer's, either married or
unmarried. The men do not want to marry them. Frequently they blame
the girl, for a great many men seem to think that it is up to the
girl to protect herself.

     I have heard men who considered themselves ethical in sexual
matters say that they believe the women should protect themselves.
Some of them excuse this by saying that women cannot trust the men
and so they must get accustomed to taking their own precautions.
Others frankly admit that they will not use anything that
interferes with their pleasure.

     A fellow doctor, one high in his profession and a man who
gives birth-control advice to his patients, once told me that he
received his pleasure from the thought of the risk.

     "If my wife is even a week pregnant, my pleasure is gone," he
said. "And I wouldn't touch a woman if I knew she was using any
sort of protective device. Man is still primitive enough to want
copulation for conception."

     He might have added that man is still primitive enough to want
to shirk all responsibility for the act and perhaps civilized
enough to regret any consequences.

     For these reasons I advise my women patients to take their own
precautions. One girl told me that she was shocked when her lover
asked her if she never used any contraceptive devices. He had made
love to her several times and she thought that he was protecting
her. She came to me for a pregnancy test. Fortunately she was all
right. But she was indignant and disgusted with the man.

     "I thought he was a swell fellow," she said. "I'd had only one
love affair and then the man took care of everything and I supposed
this man would do the same. He's shocked now because I won't see
him any more. But I hate to ask him to do anything and I'm afraid 




                         
                  
                               14

                

to risk dating him unless this is arranged beforehand. Suppose I
get a little tight? Anyhow, I can't carry around a medical kit when
I go on a date. And it's more awkward for the girl to do such
things than for the boy."

     She laughed a little self-consciously. "It sounds silly to
talk about modesty at a time like this. But these affairs usually
aren't deliberately planned. It's one thing for a man and girl to
have a steady affair and go to a hotel room with a private bath or
to an apartment where they can have everything handy. It's quite
another thing to go to a dance and have a hot petting scene on the
way back. I take this business seriously and I'm not promiscuous.
I don't mean that I've got matrimony in my eye all the time, but if
I let a man "make" me I mean for this to be an affair of fairly
long duration and I'm fond of the man. But there has to be a first
time for it; and I'm not sure when that's coming and maybe I won't
get an opportunity to protect myself. Girls in an excited emotional
state aren't noted for using their heads."

     "And another thing," she continued. "My generation may sound
hard-boiled and as if we knew what it was all about. But most of my
girl friends are pretty dumb about sex. We think we're smart
because we keep a few college boys from "making" us. And we joke
about the trade names of contraceptives, but you'd be surprised how
little practical knowledge most young girls have. A girl told me
the other day that she'd die of shame before she'd go to a doctor
and ask him about feminine hygiene. I told her that she might die
of shame if she didn't. There are a lot of jokes about how a girl
can't be raped, but if she's a little tight she hasn't got much
resistance. And most girls get panicky when they find themselves in
a difficult situation."

     The answer to all this of course would be that a girl who
can't take care of herself shouldn't take a drink and shouldn't go
out with men she can't trust. But at the same time it seems to me
that men would find it easier and better to use a little
discretion. Where do they expect the girls to get any knowledge of
birth Control? Their mothers certainly aren't going to tell them --
not if they're nice girls. The girls are afraid to ask a doctor.
The other girls they know are just as dumb. They can't believe the
advertisements they read -- if they do they'll probably get caught,
either because they don't follow the direction's or because the
stuff isn't any good. They may ruin themselves with too strong
douches or they may trust some preparation applied too long before
or too long after the sex act.

     Anyhow, the girl usually wants this whole business sentimental
and glamorous. She wants to be swept off her feet. Otherwise she
feels a little guilty about it. So she doesn't precede her moment
of grand passion with a questionnaire on hygiene. Furthermore, the
inexperienced girl has no way of knowing whether she can trust a
man. Usually she finds out that she can't when it's too late.

     A lot of the fault lies with young boys who got their first
sex experiences with older women who knew enough to guard
themselves, or with prostitutes. From the talk of youths who come
into my office, I've decided that they don't have sense enough to
take care of themselves let alone protect the girl. They're not 

                         
                  
                               15

                

bothered by false modesty, but a lot of them think it's smart to
fool the girls, either by lying to them or using some cheap trick
to make their precautions useless. The older men have more sense,
but some of them are selfish and not much concerned with protecting
a girl, or they find it hard to believe that a young woman can be
ignorant of matters so vital to her.

     I haven't any answer to the problem. Gradually hygiene classes
are becoming more liberal, but they still fall far short of what is
necessary. Doctors do what they can, but we can't go from house to
house instructing girls and boys. Like lawyers, we're usually
called in when the damage has been done. I'd like to see all high
school students given compulsory sex education.

     One doctor I know says that there should be a stiff penalty
for spreading venereal disease. I asked him how he was going to get
witnesses to testify, and I said the medical profession had better
clean house first. I pointed out that doctors have been run out of
small towns for introducing disease-stricken, cheap prostitutes who
spread the disease and brought business to the physician.

     "It's just like blackmail," I said, "The ones who are really
hurt by diseases are the nice girls, and they'd never testify
against a man. The list of men I've had in for treatment would
sound like a Who's Who of the town. You can't regulate sex. We've
just got to do the beat we can. Even if there were a fool-proof
contraceptive, which there isn't, people would forget to use it or
they wouldn't know about it, or they wouldn't believe in it."

     The most cheering thing to me is that doctors are getting more
skillful in such matters and the present generation is becoming
wiser regarding the need for knowledge. Anne, who said she would
feel foolish interrupting an ardent love scene to arrange for her
contraceptive, did not allow that false modesty to keep her from
dashing down to my office immediately for a pregnancy test instead
of waiting and worrying for several weeks until time for her
menstruation.

     More and more women are making a practice of monthly visits to
the doctor to make sure that nothing has gone wrong and to get
early aid if anything has.

     In the last few years I have had fewer women patients who had
to be told that they had waited too late; that it was too dangerous
for them to have an abortion and they'd better arrange matters so
they could have the child and have it adopted. Fewer women spend
months of mental agony hoping that something will happen to cause
a miscarriage or trying dangerous home devices. The doctor's bill
may sound steep, but it's cheaper than risking an injury by home
use of sharp instruments or by violent blows in the abdomen.

     I get more women whose menstruation has merely been delayed by
natural causes but who know it is wise to go to a doctor as soon as
they are a week or 10 days overdue. A hot bath, a few drinks, a
strong purgative or a simple prescription saves them from a lot of
worry and from dangerous patent remedies. A woman who is
persistently irregular needs medical treatment, anyhow.


                         
                  
                               16

                

     While I admire these self-reliant young women, I see a danger
in their new attitude. I do not mean the risk of promiscuity that
moralists raise whenever the birth-control question comes up.
Promiscuity, I believe, is a matter of taste and character and not
knowledge. Too, a woman who takes the trouble to inform herself on
these matters and who spends money to protect herself is going to
be smart enough to use discrimination. She's not going to be as
casual as the dumb girl who doesn't know what she's getting into.

     Nor do I howl race-suicide and say that the country will go to
the dogs because all the big families are in the lower classes. The
lower classes have always had big families. Let them share in the
knowledge, too. Many of the women would be grateful for birth-
control data.

     But I will give you an example. Not long ago a young girl came
in to see me. She was about 29, attractive, intelligent, earning
her own living. She wanted an abortion. She had the money to pay
for it and she said she wanted the best one she could get.

     I always ask the history of these cases, but it happened that
I knew this girl. Her lover was a young businessman in the same
town, handsome, healthy and with a promising future.

     "Why don't you marry, Dorothy, and have this child?" I asked.
"I know that when you started this affair your lover was still
married, although he was separated from his wife and the divorce
was pending. But now there's no obstacle to marriage. You're both
earning good salaries. You could afford a child. It would be better
for you. It isn't natural for two adults such as you and Bruce to
continue living with your families and have a clandestine
relationship. It's hard on you. It's making you nervous."

     She shrugged her shoulders. "I know," she said. "But Bruce is
panicky about marriage. He had one, and it failed. And he hates
responsibility. I'm not sure that I'd be a good wife, either. I
don't want children and I hate domesticity."

     "You're spoiled," I told her. "And even if it weren't for the
child, you ought to marry. Marriage isn't such an outdated
institution as you young folks seem to believe. There are plenty of
reasons for it, especially from the woman's standpoint. You've got
too much to risk. Here you are sneaking into my office and jumping
whenever you hear a door slam. And if I do this, you'll have to
stay in hiding for about 10 days, I don't think there's any danger,
because you're a healthy young woman. But you'll have to keep it a
secret, of course, and that's going to be a strain."

     "I know all that, too," she replied. "But Bruce and I agreed
long ago that if anything happened I was to get an abortion and
we'd split the expenses. I can't go back on that now. I'm not going
to pull the weeping-woman stunt and sandbag him into marriage. I'll
admit I'd like to be married. I'm tired of this hole-in-the-corner
business. I'm as much to blame as Bruce is for what's happened and
I'm not going to have him suspect that I arranged this to trick him
into marriage."



                         
                  
                               17

                

     "You don't need to Sandbag him, as you phrase it," I
protested. "If you're in love with each other, surely you want
something more than this. You can't go on forever having just an
affair. You can be subtle about this and arouse his sense of
possession. A lot of the happiest marriages didn't start with
romantic proposals on the bended knee. People need to have a few
responsibilities. A little encouragement and he'd be proud of the
child and proud of his marriage. And a child would hold you
together."

     "Maybe," she said, with a touch of bitterness. "And maybe not.
He had a child by his first marriage, and his wife had an abortion
when she was pregnant the second time. Children didn't hold that
marriage together. Maybe he'd be proud of me; maybe not. But I'm
too proud to make the first move. I've bragged too much about how
I, can take care of myself and how I want to stand on my own feet."

     She smiled at me. "And don't say that Bruce isn't any good
either, doctor, I happen to love him. I'll admit that he has his
faults and he's selfish. Maybe that's the fault of his first wife.
Maybe it's my fault for spoiling him. She wanted too much and asked
for it and I ask for too little. Maybe sometime we will marry. But
I'm not going to play the helpless innocent to arrange it. I don't
blame him for not wanting to marry me. His family disapproves of me
because my reputation isn't exactly unspotted. His friends don't
like me. It would make trouble if he married me -- so why should
he? This way he can take sex as an adventure."

     "It's an unhealthy state for you," I said. "You're getting to
be an emotional, nervous type."

     "I know," she interrupted impatiently, "and wondering what's
going to happen all the time doesn't make me any more calm. But
then neither does having a series of casual dates and keeping
almost strangers from 'making' me. That or an affair are the two
choices I have until some man decides to make an honest woman of
me. And i'm too proud to use any of the old gags to get a proposal.
I'm used to working as a man and getting a man's salary and being
respected as an equal."

     "You're not an equal now," I told her. "Your lover is paying
half the expenses but you are the one who'll be away from work,
who'll suffer the pain, the fear of discovery. In sex, you'll never
be man's equal. You've got to turn your weaknesses into strength.
But it's your own business, of course."

     "Sure," she said, "and if you don't want to do this, doctor,
I'll go out of town to a strange physician and use a fake name and
a fake story."

     "I'll do it," I promised, "but I don't want you back again as
a customer."

     I didn't either. At first, as I said, I did abortions for the
money in them. Later I did them because I felt I was doing the
right thing. Maybe in this case I made a mistake. The girl got
along fine. But later on she told me that after it was all over, 


                         
                  
                               18

                

her lover said that he wished she hadn't had to do it, "And then,"
she added bitterly, "he said very quickly, 'but of course I knew
that it would be impossible for you to have the child.' And I
agreed that it would have been. You see, he didn't add that he
wanted to marry me."

     But if all doctors had refused to perform the illegal
operation, he probably would have married her. And they might have
been happy. On the other hand, she might have tried some home
method and inflicted an irreparable injury.

     That's one type of patient. There was another in which I had
no qualms at all. A young teacher with a promising future came to
me. She was about 32, and did not have a very attractive face, but
she had one of the most beautiful bodies I have ever seen. And
bodies are no novelty to a doctor.

     Furthermore, she was naturally a passionate woman. But because
of her position she had to be very discreet and lead a circumspect
life. She told me that she had had sexual intercourse only two or
three times in her entire life.

     That summer she had gone to a farm to spend a week. A cousin,
who was almost an idiot, was staying there. He came into her room
one night. The teacher had one of those sudden bursts of passion
that occasionally overcome women who are forced to live suppressed
lives. She had intercourse several times with her cousin. And,
unfortunately, she was caught.

     Even had the man been fit mentally to be a father, it would
have ruined the woman's career to give birth to the child. She
would have had to marry her cousin, and that would have forced her
resignation.

     "I hate him now," she told me. "I'd rather die than marry him.
I just went crazy, that's all. And disgrace of any sort would ruin
me in my profession. I couldn't go somewhere else and start all
over again. Teachers can't do that. The Slightest stain on my
character would prevent me from getting another job."

     "Stop worrying," I said. "Everything is going to be all
right." Later on she married a fellow teacher. She came to me
before the marriage.

     "I haven't told him about it," she explained. "He knows I'm
not a virgin and he can't expect me to be -- at my age. That
doesn't make any difference. But I wonder if I should tell him the
whole story."

     "Don't," I advised her. "You paid the penalty for it. There's
no reason why you can't have children. No one can prove that you
had an abortion. Forget the whole thing."







                         
                  
                               19

                

                     V. THEY AREN'T SO EASY

     But those sample cases were several years after my first
abortion. I'll admit I was a little panicky then. I was an 
inexperienced doctor and such operations were more dangerous then.
The death rate among women with abortions was much higher than the
deaths in childbirth. If the girl died, I would go to prison and my
life would be ruined. But I needed the money.

     "I might as well go to prison as starve," I thought, and I
went ahead.

     This girl was far different from the poor teacher who had
killed herself. A married man had got her into trouble and was
paying for her operation. She didn't seem worried about it. In
fact, she seemed rather proud of her affair with a prominent man.

     "For God's sake, try to get it through her head that this is
serious business," the intermediary said. "I know that you'll keep
your month shut, but that fool girl hasn't any sense. Tell her
she'll go to jail. Tell her anything to keep her from talking."

     Her lover was married to a wealthy woman, and it was necessary
to keep the story from the wife.

     "She'd divorce him in a minute," the editor who brought me the
case said. "She's 'strait-laced. And to do X justice he isn't the
playboy type. He's got several children and he's crazy about them
and he loves and respects his wife. He went on a party with two or
three other businessmen. It started out as a stag drinking party
and someone suggested that they bring in some women. They did, and
this girl, Dot, was one of them. She was X's girl. Everybody got
drunk, and it wound up as a hotel party."

     I grained. "The usual story. Only this time. it was a man who.
got betrayed."

     "Exactly. X said that Dot, was a good sport. She isn't a
chippy or anything like that. She just went along for the party,
and it wasn't her idea to stay all night and she wasn't paid for
it. X is about 40 and he's always behaved himself pretty well. He
was flattered at a young girl liking him and he said that he wanted
to see her again. He forgot all about it, and then she telephoned
him. He felt that he owed her something for keeping quiet about the
party so he went out to see her, thinking that he'd take her a box
of candy and apologize again for the jam they'd been In. After
that, he saw a lot of her. He told me that he knew she was cheap
and ignorant but somehow that was what fascinated him. He'd seen
too much of over-civilized, inhibited women, and it was a relief to
find a girl who was pleased with whatever he did for her, who
enjoyed sex for itself alone and who gave him a good time. Pagan is
too lovely a word for it and animal sounds a little too vulgar. But
whatever she had, it went over with X."

     Dot, in her way, was one of the most unusual girts I've ever
met -- and in my business I've seen all kinds. I could see why she
had attracted a sedate, prominent businessman, and I could see why 
she puzzled the editor.

                         
                  
                               20

                

     Pagan was not the right word for her. That somehow implies
unspoiled naturalness. Dot used make-up far too liberally. She
curled her black hair tightly. She drank and she smoked. She was
not childish, she was not innocent and yet she was not vulgar. Her
idea when drinking was to keep on until she got soused. She took
her hangovers philosophically. She never seemed envious, never
blamed anyone, was always good-natured, enjoyed every treat with
fresh pleasure.

     I suppose she was mentally a little deficient, but sometimes
I've thought it would be a better world if we were all more like
Dot. Her happy-go-lucky attitude made her helpless and at the same
time provided a protection. People wanted to do things for her
because she did not clamor for her rights.

     She did not envy her lover his wealth or think that he had
hurt her. In fact, she seemed a little sorry for him.

     "He doesn't have much fun," she told me. "His wife is too
good.

     I do not like very good women."

     I smiled. "Why?" I asked.

     She looked a little astonished that I did not understand.
"Good women want to boss because they think they're always right.
They won't let people alone. When I was little, people were always
telling me to be good. Whatever I really wanted to do wasn't good
for me. And it was always bad people who did nice things for me.
And never asked anything in return."

     Oddly enough, though, it was by telling her that people would
think her lover was not a good man that I got her to promise
secrecy about the whole business. She realized that it was
important for him to appear "good."

     X came to me when it was all over and paid me. "I felt like a
cad not coming down with her," he said. "But Ben (Ben was the
editor) insisted that he'd arrange everything. And I guess he's
right when he says it's best for me not to see Dot again. I hate to
do it. It's like slapping a child. Dot's a sweet kid. A lot of
girls would be howling for money and making trouble and wanting
marriage. I've never seen anyone like her."

     "And you won't again."

     "I know," he hesitated again. "She does things that in any
other woman would disgust me. You know the sort of things I mean.
But they seem all right coming from her. She pulls tricks that I
know she must have learned from prostitutes. And with her they seem
an innocent desire to give as much pleasure as possible. I
sometimes think that if she wanted me to, I'd give up everything
and marry her."





                         
                  
                               21

                

     But he wouldn't, of course. It was the fact that she made no
demands of any kind that made him feel guilty, and he got a feeling
of virtue from toying with the idea of what he'd do if she wanted
him to. He liked to think of giving up his prestige, his money, his
respectability, as a gallant gesture. But if it came to brass
tacks, he would have decided that she was just another gold-digger
and howled like the dickens.

     Since then, I've heard a lot of men make the same curtain
speeches. Sometimes I've wanted to say exactly what I thought about
them. Sometimes it's amusing. A man comes to me to arrange for an
illegal operation. He's sweating blood. Maybe he really loves the
girl and he's worried about her. He's worried about himself, too.
And he's in a hurry. He and the girl may have waited for a month,
waiting to see if she actually were pregnant. As soon as they find
out, they're in a hurry to get the abortion over, especially the
man, since he's afraid the girl will, change her mind.

     The man is in a panic-stricken state until I agree to do it.
For once he has to eat humble pie. No matter how well he pays me
he's asking me a favor and I let him know that. The law can't do
anything to his girl for the operation. But it can do something to
me.

     He worries until everything is over and the girl is all right.
Then the cold sweat dries off and there is a reaction. Probably the
girl cools off a little. Her, scare is over, too, but her nerves
have been shot to pieces and the usual effect is that she's
irritable and quarrelsome. What she wants is a lot of tenderness,
but the man in his relief tries to laugh the whole business off. So
the man begins to think that he hasn't cut a very impressive
figure, and he wants to justify himself.

     Usually he talks a lot about what he would have been willing
to do. He figures he's safe in doing that. I don't mean that he's
always a cad, because he isn't. Men are usually a little frightened
by pregnancy. It's one thing they can't quite understand, in spite
of the graphic descriptions of childbirth that have been written by
masculine authors. He's had his nervous ordeal, too, and he'd like
to forget it but a nagging feeling of being made to appear a coward
and a fool makes him talk about it, sometimes to the girl and often
to the doctor.

     Some of the men who send girls from other towns and have
friends make all the arrangements tell me that they'd have been
glad to see me personally beforehand but they couldn't get away
from business or they felt that it was too big a risk when secrecy
was necessary. And some of the men get a little sentimental abut
the unborn child and say that if circumstances had been different
they would have been glad to do the proper thing.

     Even when they foot the entire bill and make the arrangements,
they sometimes have a feeling that they haven't exactly done their
share in this and that makes them angry. And they feel that they've
lost caste.




                         
                  
                               22

                

     I've seen a lot of couples who were genuinely fond of each
other quarrel bitterly after the worst apparently was over, simply 
because neither of them knew enough to allow for the inevitable
aftermath of such an ordeal. In the first place the man usually
minimizes what the girl is going through. A pregnant married woman
gets a lot of attention. She complains about her health, she goes
regularly to the doctor, she is petted and pampered. She gets a
special diet. She isn't allowed to do any heavy work. She is
honored by stork showers. Her husband is supposed to be especially
gentle with her. And usually he keeps up a pose, at least, even if
he is having an affair with another woman while his wife is
pregnant. He knows if he doesn't, he'll get hell from his wife's
relatives and her friends; and while men are freer from the
domination of society than women, they're just as particular, if
not more so, about cutting a good figure in the eyes of the world.

     It makes me laugh sometimes when I read masculine authors who
say wives are too strict with their husbands, just to please their
vanity and to cut a good appearance in the eyes of their friends.
Those men ought to be in my trade for a while and see some of the
things that go on under the surface.

     The girl who has an abortion doesn't dare complain about her
nausea, or her pains, or her dizziness. She has to pretend to be
bright and happy for fear people will suspect what is wrong with
her. And she has to go through an operation that is a severe
nervous shock. An abortion is not the easy thing that people who
haven't had one seem to think it is. Married mothers talk loudly
enough about how they went through the valley of the shadow of
death for their children.

     But these women can go to a good hospital and have the best
doctors and can lie in bed for the proper time afterward. And
they've got the child after they're through. The girl who has an
abortion frequently goes back to work or to her daily life before
she's ready. She can't explain too much mysterious absence. Her
first reaction is one of relief. Then she wants to talk about it
and get sympathy. Usually the only person she can talk to is her
lover. Naturally, he isn't fond of listening to her go on for hours
about how sick and scared she was. It makes him sound like a cad
for getting her into this condition. And sometimes he worries a
little about the money and that makes her mad and sometimes he
tries to justify himself by making her share the blame. If he's any
sort of a man, he feels that he was a worm for getting the girl
pregnant.

     But the girl isn't in any mood for arguing about whose fault
it was. What she wants is to be told that she is an unsung heroine,
that her lover appreciates the gallant way she went through it,
that she was humiliated by being asked a lot of questions, by
having to admit that she was, to all outside appearances, a scarlet
woman having a criminal operation. She wants to be told that her
lover admires her for what she did and loves her all the more.
Above all else, she doesn't want to have flung at her what she
usually knows, that the affair is not serious enough and their love
not deep enough for her and her lover to throw everything overboard
and go away together, get respective divorces or eliminate any 
other obstacles to marriage.

                         
                  
                               23

                

     She realizes the situation and that's why she went through a
nasty, disagreeable business. But right at the moment she wants to
pretend that this is a grand passion and worth any amount of
suffering and humiliation.

     For despite what the moralists say, a lot of "nice" women have
abortions. When you consider that doctors estimate the abortion
rate in any city as being about five times the reported birth rate,
you must realize that all these cases cannot come from the dregs of
society such as gang molls and prostitutes. As a matter of fact,
few prostitutes have abortions. They are too smart, and frequently
they get so they cannot have children, even. Then they want them
Nature has made them sterile.

     Sometimes I think that these after-quarrels are the saddest
part of the whole business. Usually the couples are reconciled
because they are genuinely fond of each other. But sometimes they
aren't, and there is bitterness over what nature intended as a
means of bringing a man and woman closer together.

     Usually my clients try to bring me an iron-clad reason why I
should perform an abortion. Sometimes I know they're lying.
Sometimes it simply happens that an affair is drifting to a close.
And at the wrong psychological moment, an accident happens, love
has died or is dying and neither the man nor woman wants marriage.
Sometimes, as Dorothy frankly admitted, the man is not the marrying
kind. More and more young and eligible men seem to be panicky about
marriage. And it is in these cases that emotional disturbances
almost invariably follow the abortion. The man and woman resent an
accident disturbing the smooth course of their love affair. Their
love is not old enough and deep enough to stand much strain, and
when the emergency is over there is a quarrel. However, I do not
moralize about such affairs. I have seen many affairs that lasted
as long as most modern marriages. Some of the couples drifted into
marriage as they grew older. And I have about as much respect for
such liaisons as for a marriage. Frequently there is more honesty,
and more fidelity, and more genuine love than in the average legal
union.

     Not long ago, I heard a young girl say glibly, "Oh, abortions
are nothing. I know a girl who had one in the morning and played
bridge that night." She may have played bridge that night, but I'll
bet she was gritting her teeth under her smile. If she did it, she
was a fool. She should have been in bed. I'll bet that after her
guest's left she burst into nervous tears. And probably for weeks
before and after the abortion it seemed to her that the
conversation was filled with joking references to pregnant women.
The truth is very rarely evident in such matters. Naturally the
girl is not going to talk about what a hard time she had. That girl
obviously had had the knife used on her. She may have felt pretty
good at the time and then weeks or maybe months later suffered
pains and discovered that she had not escaped so easily. The knife,
I maintain even in the face of those who still use it, is
dangerous.





                         
                  
                               24

                

                 VI. I HAVE A PROSTITUTE PATIENT

     After Dot, my next case was a country woman who already was in
a serious condition. Her husband, a hulking man with more
stinginess than sense, had given her a crude abortion with an
umbrella rib without even sterilizing it. Naturally the woman got
an infection. I brought her to the hospital and did what I could.
But she died. The man tried to save a small amount of money and
lost his wife.

     He tried to avoid paying me, saying that I had caused a
useless hospital bill and his wife had died anyway. But I
threatened him with complete exposure of the case and he came
across. I had no pity for him. He was the sort of man who refuses
to either restrain himself or use any sort of precaution. His wife
was a small, dainty red-haired woman, and he was a big man, too big
for her. They were mismated even if he had not been utterly callous
in his treatment of her. He could be punished only through his
purse.

     They had four small boys, the oldest only eight years old, and
his wife had rebelled against her fifth pregnancy. I gathered that
she had never really loved her husband, but he had been crazy about
her and had argued her into marriage. Later he treated with
contempt the very refinement and daintiness that had first
attracted him, boasting that there were many women who would be
glad to have him as a lover. He seemed to think it his wife's fault
that she had so many children.

     "She got pregnant when I just looked at her," he said.

     He married again a few months later but I never saw him again.

     I managed to save a neighbor of his who had given herself an
abortion and had a hemorrhage. I packed her and put her to bed.

     Some of the crude methods used are laugh-provoking; some are
tragic. I heard of a man who thrust a glass. tube into his wife's
uterus and pumped her full of air with a bicycle pump. But the
history of such cases is not completely written when the abortion
is over. The damage may not appear until the woman is pregnant
again. Women come into my office and complain of backaches, pains
in the side, general weakness. They say that they've been taking
patent medicines with no luck. Eventually I learn that they have
had miscarriages and I suspect that they were artificial.

     However, I've known of natural abortions that left no bad
aftereffects. They may have been caused by sudden shocks, by undue
exertion, by a jolt, by a nervous condition.

     It wasn't necessary for me to advertise that I was willing to
step over the line to help the fallen. Such things get about. A
pimp soon came in to arrange for an operation for his girl.

     One of the silliest objections to legalizing abortions that I
have ever heard is that it would spread vice. Crusaders have been
trying since the world began to stop vice, and the oldest 
profession still flourishes. It will continue to do so. Personally,

                         
                  
                               25

                

I'm in favor of it, with strict medical supervision. I would rather
that my young son go to a bawdy house, where a smart girl would
wise him up to the use of contraceptives, than have him
experimenting with some dumb virgin or a pick-up. I think he run's
less risk of disease if he goes to a high-priced house. He is in
less danger of being yanked into an undesirable marriage or being
gold-dug or blackmailed.

     Not long ago a boy was brought to me with a bad case of
gonorrhea, His father was tremendously shocked. The boy had tried
to keep it a secret until he grew too ill to, disguise it.

     "I've warned him and warned him," the father said.

     "That's the trouble," I replied. "You warned him against the
wrong thing."

     The father was so goody-goody that he wouldn't face the facts.
He wouldn't admit that a boy of 17 has sexual desires and it is
natural for him to satisfy them. The boy had been warned against
prostitutes, and instead of going to a house he went to a "high
class girl" who was "giving away a million dollars worth of it
free." The girl was also giving away a lot of valuable medical
business. She didn't tell the boy, of course, that she had the
disease. Instead she let him buy her some cheap gin and they went
out for a ride in the country.

     He might have got a dose at a $3 house, but I doubt it. If the
girl saw that he was dumb she'd wise him up about prophylactics.
And there wouldn't have been so much risk of the boy's trying to
make some young girl in his own set while he was diseased, if he
went to such places when he wanted only physical relief. I'm not
advising young men to go to prostitutes, but sometimes they are the
lesser of two evils,

     The pimp made arrangements for the operation in a business-
like fashion and brought his girl down. She took it for granted as
one of the risks of her profession, although some girls in the
business raise hell if they're caught. I had no scruples about
performing the operation. I didn't feel then that I was spreading
vice and I don't feel that way now. It seems to me doubly important
that a house girl should not give birth to a child. Some of the
girls marry their pimps and get out of the profession when they
become pregnant. But if they don't marry, it seems to me a crime
against society to let the child be born. The girl may have a
disease that seems to be cured and the child may be born horribly
deformed. Its father may have been diseased and the girl did not
know it.

     There have been some romantic tales written -- and some of
them may have a foundation of fact -- about beautiful young girls
reared in convents on the wages of sin. There have been more
unsavory stories of such young girls being pressed into service
when they were young; of children who led miserable lives because
of their mothers' occupation. Naturally, the girls usually cannot 




                         
                  
                               26

                

name the fathers of their children, so no help would come from that
source. For half a dozen reasons, I don't think a prostitute should
give birth to a child. And after she's pregnant, there is no time
for lecturing on why she shouldn't have allowed herself to get in
that condition.

     Fortunately, Violet had escaped disease, so there were no
complications from that source. She derived an ironic amusement
from her condition, but resented having to pay out hard-earned
money for the operation.

     "It's a helluva world," she said cheerfully. "I work all day
at this job and then for fun I get knocked up."

     She told me in private that her pimp was not the father, but
that she didn't want him to know it.

     "He's always bragging about how good he is to me in giving me
a rest when I get off work, and it would make him madder than hell
if he knew I stepped out on him," she said.

     The next girl I got from the same house wasn't nearly so calm.
She had a hot temper, and she was wanting to get virtually every
man in town to pay for the job. Violet brought her down and laughed
at her.

     "Fat chance you'd have proving anything," she jeered. "You'd
have to say, It's either Jones or Smith or Brown or Thompson if it
isn't some man I never saw before.' Just keep your mouth shut and
don't be so damned lazy."

     I got quite a lot of that trade thereafter. Later, I tried to
discourage as much of it as I could. The girls might be recognized
coming into my office. They couldn't pay much, and I was out after
higher class trade. It was bad business having them sit around in
the waiting room, although most of them were well-dressed, quiet-
looking girls.

     However, I will say that I didn't have to pamper along their
nerves and I didn't have to keep soothing them and impressing the
need for secrecy. Prostitutes have so many tough breaks that one
more didn't mean much to them.

     One day a dainty, petite little blonde came in. She was
tearful and indignant at the same time. She had such a short vagina
that douches did her no good.

     "I can't get to the bathroom quick enough," she said, "and
that fool of a husband I've got won't do anything."

     She had had one child and didn't want another one. Her husband
hated the use of contraceptives, and they were constantly
squabbling.

     "I tell him I'll leave him and I will," she said. "He doesn't
have to worry! The darned fool got me half-drunk or I wouldn't be
this way."


                         
                  
                               27

                

     She wanted a sterilization operation, but I refused to give it
to her. "You may want a child later on," I told her. "And then
You'll blame me."

     She told me about a friend of her's who was in somewhat the
same position.

     "She wants her husband to be made sterile," the woman told me.
"I've got sense enough not to ask that. But I think I'll get a
divorce. Jim is an ideal husband in other ways. But it isn't worth
it. I can't get any pleasure out of sex because I'm afraid of the
consequences. And I keep resenting Jim's attitude. He'll promise,
and then at the last minute he says that it's no fun if he has to
use anything."

     "Send him in to me," I said.

     I didn't bother him with any lectures on the mental strain he
was forcing on his wife. Instead I said, "Which would you rather
have, a frigid wife or a little less pleasure because you're
sensible and use precautions? If you're not careful, this abortion
will finish the job."

     He really loved his wife, and this warning frightened him.

     "I didn't know whether she really was telling the truth," he
said. "We had the first child because we wanted it. That's been
more than two years ago, and nothing has happened since. Part of
the time I've used contraceptives and part of the time I haven't.
I thought," he added, "that she was, just getting a lot of funny
notions from some of those cats she plays around with, and that I'd
better not humor her."

     "Better try humoring her," I told him. "It's a doctor's
prescription."

     "I will, doctor," he promised. "I didn't realize that she was
telling me the truth about the douches. She wouldn't let me go to
the doctor with her and I didn't know but what she was just panicky
or lazy. I have a friend whose wife is so sloppy that he has to
force her to go to the bathroom. Otherwise, she'll just lay there.
She wants him to do everything."

     He looked at me. "I don't suppose Anna told you. I'd been
married before?"

     "No," I answered, beginning to take an interest in Jim. It
looked as if there were another side to the story. I'd believed be
was merely thoughtless to what I deemed an almost criminal point.

     "I was divorced from my first wife," he said. "And the reason
I fell in love with Anna was because she seemed to be so gay and
wholesome about sex."

     "A man's idea of a wholesome attitude toward sex frequently
means that the girl is either dumb or too trusting," I interrupted.
"A woman who runs the risk of unwelcome pregnancy rather than 


                         
                  
                               28

                

insist that a man use artificial methods to prevent conception is
going to become nervous and irritable sooner or later. A wholesome
attitude is one where you can discuss this matter and arrive at a
decision agreeable to you both."

     He shrugged his shoulders. "I don't mean that. I'll explain.
When my first wife, Audrey, and I were on our honeymoon, we went to
a quaint inn up in the mountains. We had a big room with a
fireplace and a bearskin rug in front of it. I wanted to make love
to her on the rug. She objected; said it made her feel like a dog.
Later I wanted to make love to her in a meadow filled with flowers.
She thought it was beastly. When we went to visit her people or my
people, she refused to have anything to do with me because they
might hear us. And she was always afraid the servants might hear
something."

     "It began to give me inhibitions," he said frankly. "I'd been
brought up in a fairly strict household myself. Audrey's attitude
ruined our marriage and my love for her. Her idea of the proper
approach to sex took away most of my pleasure. Finally we got a
divorce. I was gun-shy of marriage until I met Anna. She Seemed so
free from complexes that I guess I went to extremes the other way.

     I remembered Dot who had been so "natural" according to her
lover. I found myself telling Jim about her. He stared at me.

     "I knew her slightly," he said. "You mean Dow' and he gave her
real name.

     It was my turn to be a little startled. "Yes, but I didn't
mean to violate a confidence. I hope you'll keep this a secret. I
didn't suppose you'd ever heard of the girl."

     He smiled a little grimly. "You're not violating any
confidence. Or at least you're not spilling any beans. I knew all
about it. X's wife is my sister. But didn't you know Dot is dead?"

     "Good God, no," I exclaimed. "What was the matter? The
operation was a success. I'm positive of that."

     "Oh, the operation was all right. And X, like a good boy, went
back to his wife and was the model husband. He gave Dot some money,
but since he became the virtuous spouse he didn't feel that he
should keep on paying money to a woman he no longer saw. And Dot
was too good looking and too carefree to hold a job long. So she
drifted from one man to another, and finally one of them strangled
her with her own silk stocking. He caught her being unfaithful with
another man."

     "I don't remember seeing anything about it in the newspapers,"
I said.

     "Oh, it wasn't in this town," Jim told me. "But she'd kept a
card of my brother-in-law's all these years. So they notified him
of her death. He was in a funk. He was afraid they'd learn of the
old affair. So he sent me to keep him out of it, arrange for the 



                         
                  
                               29

                

funeral and send her some flowers, anonymously. I told the
officials that he'd helped to get her a job once. And I managed to 
get her a quiet funeral and send her some flowers without mixing
him up in it."

     He was more impressed by my connecting Dot with his wishes
regarding his wife than by any lecture I could have given him. I
saw his wife later and she seemed perfectly happy. She told me that
her married life was now perfect.

     I had not lied when I told Jim that abortions sometimes made
women frigid. The same thing often happens with childbirth. Memory
of the pain soon fades, but there is a vague emotional hangover,
especially if the woman feels she has been unfairly treated. Women
who are naturally a little under-sexed may have their emotions
drained by the experience.

     On the other hand, sometimes it makes women more passionate.
They feel that they know the worst that can happen to them. And
usually they have acquired better knowledge of birth-control
measures, either from the doctor or from realization that previous
carelessness must be stopped.

     I talked to a woman recently who had been having an affair for
several years. Her nerves were shaky. She asked me several discreet
but leading questions about abortion's.

     "Do you need one?" I asked bluntly.

     She shook her head. "I don't think so, but this is one of my
worrying days. I worry constantly for about the last half of my
period. I feel safe during menstruation and for some reason feel
quite safe for the first week or so thereafter. I suppose it's
relief from having passed another period without danger. But along
about this time I get nervous and wonder if something could have
gone wrong and figure out what I'd do if anything happened.
Sometimes I think I'd feel better if I were caught and had to go
through an operation. Then Id know that there is no fool-proof
method of contraception. I'd know what to do in case anything went
wrong again and just what it would be like. And I could decide once
and for all whether to go on with this affair."

     "I don't see how women stand it," I said frankly. "Of course,
we doctors have our worries, too. But we've got a good stock alibi
ready if anything slips and we get paid well for our worrying. It's
bad enough for married women. However, most of them plan to have
children when they marry. But girls like you --."

     "Some of us don't stand it." She gave me a wry smile. "I could
give you a list of some who haven't borne up under it too well. The
thing that saves the majority of modern mistresses from nervous
breakdowns is that the affairs don't last more than a year or so,
and then the couple either marries or they break up and the girl is
so sick of uncertainty that she marries the first man who comes
along with a proposal in his hand."




                         
                  
                               30

                

     I grinned. "And by then, I suppose they're so tired of
worrying that it's almost a relief when they get pregnant and stay
that way."

     She nodded. "That's why you see a lot of attractive young
businesswomen -- girls in their late 20's and early 30's -- who
have been going around with equally attractive men suddenly marry
sappy-looking eggs who can offer them a home and security but no
romance. The ones who don't -- well, a friend of mine is in a
hospital now recovering from a nervous collapse. Other girls drink
too much. I know one who has taken to drugs."

     I never have become calloused to hearing stories like that. Of
course, I took them much more seriously when I first started to
practice. For a while it seemed to me that I was peculiarly lucky
in being first too poor and then too busy to have much to do with
sex except in a professional way.


                   VII. MY OWN ROMANCE CRASHES

     After I had launched myself into the illegal side of my
profession I began to take it for granted. Of course, I solemnly
warned my sub-resa patients of the danger of talking. But my name
was mentioned because many of my later patients came to me on the
recommendation of friends who said that I was discreet, efficient
and reasonable in price.

     I didn't object, because such advice was given in confidence
to persons who were not likely to broadcast the information in the
wrong quarters.

     However, it was not until I met Rose that I saw how the change
in my professional attitude might effect my private life.

     I had more money now, and could afford to have more
recreation. I had a bank account, and I was slowly paying my father
back the loan he had made me. I felt that I was entitled to a
little fun. So I looked up a friend of college days and he invited
me to a party. Rose was there.

     It was a case of immediate mutual attraction. I was girl-
starved and I was still idealistic as far as my personal life was
concerned. That was in the days of the short skirts. Rose wore a
frivolous blue taffeta frock coming just to her knees. Above it her
blond curls, blue eyes and rosebud mouth looked like those of a big
doll. Nowadays I probably would dismiss her as insipid. Then I
thought she was the prettiest girl I had ever seen.

     I had just acquired a car and was very proud of it. I took
Rose home. I think she was thrilled by her conquest. Women like to
display their power, a trait that frequently gets them into
trouble. They will encourage a man just to flatter their vanity and
then try to retreat when he gets serious.





                         
                  
                               31

                

     I gave Rose a big rush. My intentions were honorable, as the
old-fashioned phrase has it. I thought it was a good idea for a 
doctor to be married and I thought Rose would make me a perfect
wife. I see now how foolish that was and how lucky I was to escape
her, but at the time I was youthful enough to consider beauty all-
sufficient.

     I met her father, a pompous businessman, and her mother, a
minor society woman. The whole thing seemed ideal. I would get a
young and pretty wife. I would be allied with a respectable family,
and that would help me in my profession. A few women like a good-
looking young doctor, but the majority of the patients want a
middle-aged or elderly man with a lot of dignity. The young doctor
may be a better physician, but patients believe that the older man
can be relied upon more because of his experience. However,
marriage lends an Aura of respectability.

     Mothers feel better when their children are being examined by
a gray-haired man with the manner of a priest at confession. And
with men there is it jealousy of a young doctor. I think they would
prefer the old Chinese custom of having eunuchs to wait upon their
women. I have had women tell me that their husbands and lovers were
jealous because "strange doctors" give them examinations. I know of
such cases in my own practice, when men reluctantly gave permission
to have their wives or sweethearts examined, or treated, or even
submit to an abortion. They seemed to feel that in some fashion I
have ravished them or had a sexual experience that they had been
denied.

     But to go back to my romance. I paid court in the traditional
fashion. I sent Rose flowers and candy. I took her to the theater
and to parties. I restricted myself to a few kisses and embraces.
I intended my marriage to be free from any emotional hangover. I
wanted a virgin bride, and I wanted an aroma of orange blossoms
around everything.

     I had been going with Rose for about six weeks when she
telephoned that her mother wanted to see me. Rose let me in the
house and avoided my hasty kiss. She looked pale and somehow
indignant.

     "Aha," I thought, "the old lady's been inquiring about my
intentions and Rose is peeved because I haven't popped the
question. I'll soon put that right."

     I felt a little irritated as I smiled in an encouraging
fashion at Rose. The Garners seemed to be rushing things a little.
I wanted to propose and receive her acceptance in the best 19th
Century romantic style -- my literature was old-fashioned -- and
then go to her father to ask for her hand. I was in favor of
marrying as soon as possible, but I wanted to arrange the whole
business in my own way.

     Mrs. Garner rose from her chair when I came into the room. She
didn't invite me to sit down.

     "I'm sorry to have to say this to you, Martin," she began. "I 
understand from Rose that you have always treated her with respect
--"
                         
                  
                               32

                

     "Of course," I said hurriedly. "I want to marry Rose, Mrs.
Garner. Perhaps I should have declared my intentions sooner, but I
was not sure Rose returned my affection. I can support a wife. I
haven't much money now, but my practice is growing. If she's
willing to start humbly --"

     Her face hardened. "Don't add insult to injury, Dr. Avery. I
know all about your profession. I didn't want to have to drag that
in. Fortunately, you hadn't mentioned it to Rose. I have not told
her the details. As for her affections, she will get over this
foolish infatuation quickly enough. I have, caught it in time,
thank heavens!"

     I was stunned. "What's the matter with my profession?" I
demanded. "I'm a doctor. I'm not a very good one yet, but I'm
making a living. It's an honorable calling."

     "You," she was almost stuttering with cold rage. "You're a
child murderer! My husband told me all about it. And you want to
drag our daughter into the filth and slime of your work! You who
help the hardened creatures of the world with their sins -- only
you are worse than they are. If it were not for people like you,
they might reform."

     "It isn't murder," I retorted angrily, forgetting that I had
once very nearly shared her view. "It isn't murder any more than it
was murder when you and your husband decided not to have any more.
children after Rose was born."

     "Get out," she shouted furiously. "I won't bandy words with
you. Get out, and stay away from my daughter!"

     I got out. I was mad enough not to try to see Rose, either.
I'd wanted me drama in my romance and I got it. And in my anger I'd
hit the sorest point in the armor of the righteous.

     There are very few women who want their children, and there
are fewer yet who want an unlimited number. I've met a few young
wives who wanted children immediately, but most of them don't want
to be tied down. They want to arrange their children. That's
reasonable and natural. And the crusaders usually don't have many
children. If they did, they wouldn't have time to run other
people's business. A lot of them are equally indignant about the
large, families among the poor. They're not so much against big
families as they are against the parents having any fun.

     I used to marvel at the twisted, perverted forms that sex
took. Nowadays I marvel that there is as much naturalness connected
With sex a's there is.

     Mrs. Garner hated me because I helped girls out of their
mistakes. She wanted them to suffer because she hadn't enjoyed
herself. Probably she was one of those unfortunate women who spend
the early part of their lives dreading pregnancy so that they never
enjoy the sex act, the sort of woman who thinks it somehow cheap to
be caught on her wedding night. Then with her menopause, she
probably found out that she'd waited too late for sex enjoyment. 
Either her passion had died a natural death or her husband was
impotent.
                         
                  
                               33

                

     Since the time when Mrs. Garner arbitrarily decided that I was
not a fit companion for her daughter because I faced the facts
about sex, I have seen a lot of peculiar things and developed more
tolerance. Then I was furious at her. Oddly enough I probably
treated-her daughter with more respect than most other men would
have, partly because I was still young and idealistic and partly as
a reaction from the sordid part of my business.

     I would have made Rose a much cleaner and more romantic
husband than some man who had not seen the results of sexual
abnormalities and irregularities and flouting of conventions.

     Eventually, Mrs. Garner married Rose to a small-time
businessman who made a household drudge out of her. Rose grew fat,
peevish and complaining. She came to me several times with minor
ailments. She didn't have good health. She virtually ruined herself
by taking too strong medicines and using too harsh disinfectants.
I could have saved her all that. But her mother was a good woman!
Afterward, I was thankful that I'd escaped Rose. She and her mother
drove her husband half mad complaining because he didn't make
enough money. Finally he became a habitual drunkard. He was weak
and so was Rose; and Mrs. Garngr ruined their lives by prying and
dictating. Rose felt that she committed a crime when she became
pregnant and felt equally guilty when she tried to prevent
conception.

     But that day, of course, I didn't know anything about that. I
went on a binge and wound up in a house of prostitution.

     And there, ironically enough, I found myself in a room with
Violet, the first house girl I'd had for a patient.

     "What the hell are you doing here, doc?" she demanded. "I'm a
cash customer," I laughed. "What do you think I'm doing, picking
daisies?"

     "You're drunk," she told me.

     "Of course," I agreed amiably. "My girl's mother told me to
get the hell out of there. She thinks I live in the gutter with
girls like you. So here I am."

     Violet sniffed. "Probably her old man comes here, too, for
half and half. That's what good women do to men." I sobered up and
went back to work the next day and knocked a lot more silly,
romantic ideas out of my head. At lunch I met a doctor friend of
mine, one who sent me some business occasionally. I hear you're
going to marry," he said.

     Eventually," I told him, "but I've no prospects in sight just
now.

     "What's happened to the big romance?" he asked. "I saw you
beaming at the Garner girl like a love-sick calf the other night."

     "The love-sick calf has had a good dose of salts and is
cured," I told him. "Mamma and papa disapprove of the way I 
practice my great profession."

                         
                  
                               34

                

     He grinned. "You've got a clean job compared to some
psychoanalysts I know. They really get the sex dirt dished out to
them. I've just been talking to one. A woman came to me and asked
to be examined, said she wasn't getting any kick out of her married
life."

     "Tell her to be glad she's a good woman," I grunted.

     "I told her she had nothing organically wrong with her," my
friend went on. "Then I asked her the usual questions. Everything
seemed all right to me. She said the sex act was completed, she
loved her husband, nothing is wrong with him, no trace of
perversion. From her description, it sounded like a perfectly
normal coition. But she wasn't satisfied. She thought she was being
cheated out of something. So she went to the psychiatrist. And you
ought to hear the pay-off."

     "Go on," I said. "I'm listening."

     "That was her trouble, too. She'd been listening to a gal in
the same apartment house, a divorcee. The other woman got a divorce
because she couldn't or wouldn't sleep with her husband. She
doesn't have much to do with men nowadays, and when she doe's,
she's a teaser. Gets a big kick out of the preliminaries, but won't
go any farther. However, she's been driving two or three of her
married women friends crazy with descriptions of how thrilling the
sex act should be. As a matter of fact, she's never got any kick
out of it at all, not even the normal kind. And she's not a pervert
or a practicing one at least."

     "Nice woman," I muttered.

     "Very," said my friend. "The psychiatrist had a hard time
convincing my patient that she was getting everything there was out
of sex and that she should pay no attention to her neighbor.
Advised her to move, in fact. I'd rather have an out-and-out
pervert try to Convert my wife than have one of those dirty-minded
wenches around. They're worse than the so-called good women who try
to tell a woman that enjoyment of sex is sinful. It's pretty hard
to convince a woman that it's wrong for her to have a good time.
But when someone tells her that she ought to be having a better
time, she's liable to start trying out other men."

     "The whole business is crazy," I said. "Seems to me that we'd
be more sensible if we had rutting period's as the animals do and
got it all over with in a few days."

     He grinned. "We're the higher order. We can think! We can
reason!"

     I went back to the office pretty well soured on the whole
thing. A woman came in and tried to convince me she was pregnant.
Most women fight against the idea and keep hoping that even the
doctor may be wrong, But once in a while there's a nut who's so
full of symptom's, both genuine and imaginary that she wears a path




                         
                  
                               35

                

to the doctor's office. This woman didn't want a child, but the
fear of pregnancy obsessed her. If she gained a pound and it showed
as it usually does, on her breasts and hip's, she decided that She
was caught and rushed right down to see me.

     I got rid of her and settled down with a magazine. Then two
well-dressed, pretty young women came in. One of them looked as if
she had been crying. Both were nervous. I recognized the symptoms.

     The prettiest girl introduced herself and her companion. She
was tall and slender without being either skinny or curved in the
wrong places. Even in the awkward knee-length dresses of that
period she looked graceful. She had intelligent-looking gray eyes,
dark brown hair, combed simply and lips with a tendency to curve
upward. Her companion was sweet-looking rather than beautiful and
she didn't have the competent air of her friend.

     Norma, the prettier of the two, did the talking for herself
and for Pearl. She came right to the point. She said she understood
that sometimes I helped girls out of trouble.

     I was cautious. Neither girl wore a wedding ring. They didn't
look like street-walker's, but I had to be careful. I told them to
tell me the whole story, adding that it would be in strict secrecy.

     "It's a simple story," Norma said. "Pearl is in a jam. She
isn't married, and so it's important that she get rid of the child
and do it as quickly as possible. I've heard that she can register-
in at a hospital and say she's married and have the operation as
essential to her health. But I don't know how to go about it."

     "Better not try it," I advised. "It's too risky. In the first
place, in this State three physicians must certify that the
operation is essential to her health, And the case would be
investigated. A good doctor isn't going to risk putting his name on
record in such a case."

     "Then what do you advise?" Norma asked.

     "Where's the father of the child?" I asked. I always want the
men in the case to appear. In the first place, the men usually foot
the bills. In the second, I want to have a clear understanding
among all concerned before I risk my career for an operation. A
hysterical woman may -- and sometimes does -- rush into my office
and want something done right away. Later She may discover that the
man would have married her and she blames me. Or the man may have
scruples against such operations or the family may raise hell.
Sometimes wives try to get abortions when their husbands are
absent. The husband may stir up a devil of a mess when he finds it
out, and the woman may not be able to pay and there may be charges
that the doctor induced the woman to undergo the operation. If
something happens to the woman in such a case, the doctor may as
well buy his railroad ticket and leave before he finds himself
behind bars.

     "He's on a business trip," Pearl said, "and it's important
that I don't bring him back for this."


                         
                  
                               36

                

     That sounded fishy and I said so in as tactful a fashion as I
could manage. I told her that his presence was important. Then the
story came out. The man was married to an insane woman now in an
institution. The wife was a Catholic and so were all her people.
The husband made her regular visits, and he was on one now. He
occupied a position in a firm largely controlled by his wife's
relatives. He couldn't divorce his wife, and so they we're waiting,
patiently hoping that her failing health would end her life.

     The man's job took him away from our city much of the time. He
had been gone for about six weeks and it would be several weeks
before he returned. Pearl wanted to get the whole business over
before he came back.

     "I'll tell him, of course," she said. "But it's almost
impossible for him to return now and it would do no good. I've
plenty of money and Norma will look after me. He's got troubles
enough without my adding to them. If I let him know now he'd
probably dash back here and the whole story might come out. We've
gone through too much to risk endangering everything because of
this unfortunate happening.

     I believed her. She was in a bad spot.

     "All right," I said. "I'll help you."

     "We'll pay you in advance," Norma told me eagerly. "Then
you'll know we're all right."

     Of course, it is customary in all these cases to get payment
in advance. No abortionist is going to take the risk without being
paid, and paid well, in advance. Once the abortion is over, the
doctor has no hold over the woman. It is the surgeon who commits
the crime, not the girl.

     No girl needs to be blackmailed by a quack abortionist if she
will keep that in mind. He may threaten to expose the whole thing;
may produce documents from his files. But if she pays him in cash,
pays him in advance, and then bluffs, she'll be all right. He won't
dare say anything about it. He'll not only let himself in for a
prison sentence but he'll also kill his practice at once. Once he
has come out in the open about one abortion, no one else will trust
him.

     But that day I forgot my strict rules. "No hurry about that,"
I told them "You can take your time."

     They looked a little relieved. I learned afterward that they
had brought every cent they had in the world and were prepared to
offer it to me. My charges then were not so high as they are at
present, when I never accept anything less than $125, and sometimes
my fees are as high as $500.

     The girl had arranged to take a short vacation. She moved into
a small apartment with Norma. It may be that I called there oftener
than professional purposes required. But the appreciation expressed
by the two girl's helped to soothe my vanity, wounded by Mrs. 
Garner's outburst.

                         
                  
                               37

                

     "It's ridiculous," Norma exclaimed, "that we have to hide in
here in order to prevent a tragedy. Oh, I know we have to do it,"
she added quickly. "But here is Pearl, trying to get a little
happiness. Here you are, trying to do some good. Here I am, just
standing by. And all three of us would be disgraced if this got
out. If someone wrote a play about the situation and a beautiful
woman did it on the stage, she'd be a heroine. But in real life the
fiction Situations don't work out so well."

     "I know," I said. "Camille is a figure of romance and all the
women in the audience weep when she dies. But if Camille were
working hard to earn her living and trying to have a little
pleasure in the evening and got caught and went to an abortionist,
she'd be that 'wild little French girl' and the good ladies would
sniff and say it only went to show that foreigners couldn't be
trusted and they've been thinking that their husbands should fire
that dark-haired, dark-eyed girl in the office. She's too pretty to
be a really efficient typist."

     I told Norma about my brief fling with Rose Garner.

     "Even my love affair aborted," I Said grimly.

     But Norma was laughing. She choked and waved her hands. "I
don't mean to laugh at you. It's just that I remembered what Mr.
Garner does."

     "He's a druggist. He's something in a wholesale company."

     "And he's also a big stockholder in a company that
manufactures hot water bottles and syringes," Norma replied. "It's
all right to buy a douche bag. And you can buy all the salves and
jellies and everything else for 'feminine hygiene' that you want.
A lot of them may be dangerous; a lot of them may be worthless. But
nothing is done about that. The ounce of prevention is perfectly
legal, and if the prevention isn't any good, the manufacturers are
safe. Mr. Garner sells plenty of disinfectant that is less powerful
than soap and water and some that's so harsh the solution ruins
your hands. But when people actually need help, he's moralizing
somewhere."

     "Well," I said, "no statues are being erected to me. And a lot
of the time I don't get any thanks for what I've done."

     Of course, no doctor expects thanks. He's supposed to do his
best even if he feels the patient isn't worth saving. He's supposed
to work when he feels that he isn't going to get paid. But he isn't
risking his future and a damned disagreeable prison sentence for
it.

     A lot of my patients come in virtually on their knees. They
continue to be abject until the operation is a success. Then they
may hear about a quack who would have done the same thing for $10
or $15. Why shouldn't he be cheap? He hasn't had any expensive
medical training. He hasn't got half as much to lose as I have. He 




                         
                  
                               38

                

may be good. There are men who can perform abortions skillfully and
can't do anything else. Some of them are doctors who have already 
lost their licenses to practice; Some are premedical student's who
dropped out. And there are old women with an uncanny skill at the
business.

     So when it's all over and the money has been paid in advance,
a patient, or more often the man who footed the bills, may get to
thinking that that was a lot of money for what little was done. And
he feels wronged. An abortion has no permanent effect like the
removal of an appendix or tonsil's. The man wants to blame somebody
for this business just to get rid of surplus irritation that he
hasn't dared to take out on the girl. So he treats me as a quack
and a sharper and a few other disagreeable things.

     It reminds me of a man I knew who went on periodical drunks.

     "I stay sober for weeks and nobody says that it's fine I'm
restraining myself," he told me once, "but as soon as I go on a
toot, everybody says, 'Look, he's drunk again."

     I told the story to Norma. She didn't laugh. "It's funny, I
know. But look at us. I mean, Pearl and myself. Outwardly we're
good girls, nicely mannered, hard working. Nobody brags on us
because we are behaving ourselves. That"s natural. We're all
supposed to behave ourselves. But let us, make one slip and we're
marked for life. Oh, I know, people don't talk about scandal
constantly as some girls seem to think. And lots of girls who have
been naughty become nice. But always there's someone who's going to
say, 'I remember when she got into a jam and they say there was a
hush hush operation.' Probably that person doesn't mean anything by
it. It's just casual gossip. But did you ever notice the peculiar
glint women get in their eyes when the subject of pregnancy is
introduced. They invariably count the months if the woman is
married. And if she's not, they lower their voices and start
discussing the possible fathers."

     I grinned. Norma and I were good friends by now. I enjoyed
blowing off steam to her and she talked with amazing frankness to
me. I told her how I'd started doing abortions.

     "I suppose vanity was one reason why I hated it," I remarked.
"Any starving doctor could look down upon me for violating the
ethics of the profession. Same way any physician rather looks down
on a dentist. The dentist may be making a lot more money but he
never has ranked quite so high."

     "I know," Norma said. "I knew a girl who fell in love at first
sight with a man. But when she found out he was a dentist, she was
humiliated and refused to see him again."

     She looked at me. "I'm not noted for any piety," but I believe
that your credits and debits will balance on Judgment Day."

     It was about this time that I turned down my first case. I had
always told myself that I meant to use discrimination in this
business and the only way I could maintain my self respect was to 
take only such case's as I felt worthwhile.

                         
                  
                               39

                

     A very pretty, richly-dressed young woman came into my office,
accompanied by her mother and her sister. This was unusual. It had
so happened that my previous clandestine patients before had
consisted of girls anxious to keep news of the operations from
their families. It is an indictment of family life and the much-
touted mother love that girls will tell their troubles to friends
before they will confide in their parents.

     Of course, there are several other reasons for that. Sometimes
it is merely a desire to spare pain and worry. The girls are not in
a mood to listen to maternal anxiety. It is the same thing that
causes many girls to want their lovers or husbands away when they
are going through an abortion. They sometimes prefer the more
impersonal kindliness of a nurse or a close friend. They know that
they are going to be in a great deal of pain, that they are not
going to be at their best and vanity keeps them from wanting anyone
really close to them around.

     But I was pleased at the sight of the mother. I felt somehow
that she lent more respectability to the visit. This thought
disappeared in a few moments. The girl, I learned, was the wife of
a wealthy young man in a nearby city.

     She was annoyed and petulant over her pregnancy. She was just
starting to have a good time as a young wife in a smart young
married set, and she hated to have her fun interrupted by
motherhood.

     "I know just how Frances feels," her mother told me. "She has
all those lovely new clothes and the season is just beginning. And
she has such a beautiful figure. It would never be the same again.
Men are so selfish about such things."

     "Then her husband doesn't approve of the operation?" I asked.

     Both mother and daughter burst into tirades against the
general selfishness of mankind. Finally I managed to extract the
information that the young husband did not even know his wife was
pregnant.

     "And he isn't going to," Frances said firmly. "He'd probably
raise the dickens and insist on my going through with it. Men are
foolish about children, They don't have to get all ugly and clumsy
and ridiculous-looking. Of course, I did tell Jack that I wanted
children. But I don't want them right away. Later on, I'd like a
boy and a girl, right together so they'll be cute to dress."

     She paused, apparently admiring herself as an attractive young
mother.

     "Later on it may be harder for you to have children," I
remarked.

     She dismissed that. She was the type who regards everything
beyond tomorrow as being vaguely in the far distant future and not
to be taken into consideration.



                         
                  
                               40

                

     Both women annoyed me. They irritated me further by saying
that they would pay any price "so long as it's reasonable." They
seemed to regard the whole business in the light of pulling a
disfiguring tooth. There also was the attitude that they were
really doing me a favor by bringing the job to me.

     "I can't do anything about it," I told them. "If your husband
should find out about it he could send me to prison. Even with his
consent, it would still be too dangerous. Later, you'll want a
child, and if you can't have one you'll blame me. You're young and
healthy and you have plenty of money. Your husband will love you
even more if you have the child. So go home and forget about it."

     They burst into torrents of rage then, but I shooed them
firmly out of my office and gasped with relief. They were the worst
type of patient. In the first place, they would have made trouble
all through the case, complaining about any pain and having to be
pampered.

     "I usually try to send the mother home," a doctor told me
later. "She'll raise hell all the time she isn't telling you what
to do and how she had her children. Mothers make the worst possible
nurses because they want to do whatever the patient asks instead of
what is good for her. They'll feed the girl the wrong things,
refuse to make her exercise and spread the news around at the tops
of their voices."

     Another danger is that patients of this type are babblers.
Secure in their moneyed and social positions, they don't give a
damn what happens to the doctors. Afterward they are likely to
regard all abortion in the light of an interesting tea-table
conversation subject, along with nervous breakdowns and trips to
Europe. They tell the whole thing, including the doctor's name and
address.

     Such frivolous women may manage to keep the abortions secret
from their husbands for a while, but when it's all over they get
careless. And when they can't have children, the husbands blame the
doctor and think he probably performed a sterilization operation in
secret or did a bad job. There is something mysterious about an
abortion to the lay mind, anyhow. I've heard people inquire if I
actually cut out some of the organs. An abortion is simply what the
name implies, a premature birth, before the woman is more than
three months pregnant. After that it is more dangerous and comes
under the term of miscarriage. But I have had girls come to my
office and expect to go under ether and have ugly abdominal sears.

     A successful abortion does not prevent a woman from having
children later on. But some women are not very fertile and one
pregnancy exhausts them. Or society women, such as Frances, may
keep their vitality at low ebb by reducing diets or by high nervous
strain and be unable to bear a child. Or they may ruin themselves
by use of too strong contraceptives. And in all such cases the
abortionist is blamed.





                         
                  
                               41

                

     In Frances' case, the fault lay in the lack of understanding
between husband and wife. It may take some of the roses and 
moonlight and glamour out of young married life to discuss such
things cold-bloodedly, and one woman told me that she grew to hate
her. husband because he insisted on analyzing their emotions before
and after the sex act, but there would be fewer husbands and wives
drifting apart if they talked things over.

     Frances probably lacked the courage to tell her fiance that
she didn't want children for several years. She may have been
afraid that he would not marry her if he knew her true views. I
don't think she wanted children at all, but there are other wives
who actually desire a family but want the first year or two of
their marital companionship without the complications of a child.

     A man came to me once for examination. "I want to know if
there's anything the matter with me," he said. "I've been married
two years, and we haven't had any children. If I'm sterile, I
should know it because it isn't fair to my wife. She wants
children."

     I suppressed a laugh. I knew that his wife used contraceptives
regularly because she had come to me about them.

     "Is she in a hurry for a child?" I asked.

     "No. She's very nice about the matter. But when we were
married we both agreed that we wanted children. Of course, nothing
definite was said about when, I thought we'd just let nature take
its course."

     I told him there was nothing wrong with him and advised him to
talk it over with his wife. I also told him to send her to me. She
came in a few days later.

     I didn't bother about giving her an examination. She was a
friend of mine, and I simply told her what her husband had said.
She sighed.

     "I didn't know he was in a hurry about having a child. Of
course I'm willing. I want children and I told Leslie so. But he
never said anything definite about the matter and didn't appear
very eater to be a father, So I thought I'd enjoy being carefree as
long as possible."

     "You see," she went on, "I know husbands who talk about how
fond they are of children, but then when their wives become
pregnant, they are peeved because she doesn't feel well and she
can't be gay and a good sport. And when the child comes, It's the
woman's responsibility Even if the man is a good father, it's the
woman who has to take care of the child all day. I'm not going to
be one of those women who complain about being tied down by a
child. Leslie is tied down to a desk all day supporting me, and I
ought to do my share."





                         
                  
                               42

                

     She grinned a little impishly. "I don't take that too
seriously, either," she added. "Leslie was tied down to that desk 
before he met me. The only difference is now he has more
responsibilities. But I didn't see any point in adding to those
responsibilities unless I thought he wanted them."

     I smiled at her. "You're a smart woman, Jane. But be careful
of being too smart and figuring things out too closely. There's as
much danger in making a slip in too close calculations based on
human nature as there is in being too careless."

     "You're telling me," she replied. "I thought I was being smart
in saving Leslie from the results of his vagueness, and here he is
dashing around to doctors to find out if anything is wrong with
him. But you see, Martin, when we were going together, Leslie was
cursed by a desire to evade being definite about anything. He was
the sort of man who telephoned and said he might call me later that
night if he could get away. That kept me at home all evening
waiting for his call, because I'd rather take a chance of being
with him than go somewhere else and disappoint him if he did call.
Or he'd say that he'd call me about the middle of the week and I'd
stay at home Wednesday and Thursday nights. And he'd say, 'I'll
come by between seven-thirty and eight-thirty,' leaving me
twiddling my fingers for an hour."

     I nodded. Such things often seem unimportant to the man who is
busy until the time he goes to see a girl, but they may make or
break the romance. I knew a girl who broke off a love affair
because of such treatment.

     "If he can't make up his mind when he wants to see me when
he's courting me, what will he be like after we're married when he
feels that he can take me for granted?" She, had said.

     But Jane was still talking. "And he had a beautiful habit of
just dropping by in the morning to see me. He'd be out and around
town on business. He'd find me looking like hell and busy. But he
thought it nice to surprise me. Same way, sometimes he'd drive by
at night or call at an hour when I had either decided to stay at
home or had made other arrangements. I was so much in love that
this seemed petty. But I decided that after marriage I would take
things into my own hands a little more. So I did. Leslie was just
as vague about having children."

     Shocking as it might seem to their mothers, who preferred to
Vail the whole thing in reticence and look upon pregnancy either as
an act of God or a cross to bear, most modern young women prefer to
plan their romances, their marriages and their children. It's only
natural. Everything else about their lives is planned. This is
especially true of businesswomen who marry. They want a certain
number of children at a time when they can afford them and at a
time when the birth does interfere with other important things.

                 VIII. I CONTRIBUTE TO THE ARTS

     Shortly after I turned down the case of the society bride, I
did perform an abortion on a married woman.


                         
                  
                               43

                

     A young couple came into the office. They were shabbily
dressed but there was something clean and vital about them. They
held hands shamelessly and came into my private office together.

     The girl was slight with a mop of rumpled curl's and big dark
eyes. She was not really pretty but she had a vivid charm. The
youth had a freshly-washed, boyish look that appealed to me.

     They both started to talk at once, then looked at each other
and were silent. Finally the boy acted as spokesman.

     "I'm an artist," he announced, "and my wife here is a writer.
We've just been married about six months and we're poor as church
mice. We've got what are known as futures but very little present."

     I guessed immediately what they wanted but I let them go on.
The boy, he was just that, introduced them. The girl's name was
vaguely familiar to me. She had sold some free-lance material to
newspapers and to a few cheap magazines. I had read one of the
stories. It was not smoothly written but it had life in it. The boy
had painted pictures that were hung in good exhibits but thus far
neither had had any financial success. But they were still hopeful.
And now they had the chance of a life-time. A magazine had offered
to sponsor them on a boat trip along several scenic rivers. The
girl was to write the articles and the boy was to illustrate them.
They had expended most of their capital on a boat, supplies and
painting materials.

     "It might be made into a book afterward," the girl's eyes were
glowing. "But since we're unknowns, we can't get much of an
advance. We got a little and spent that on the boat and our camping
outfit. And then," she flung out her hands, "then I had to go and
get pregnant."

     "Can't you go ahead with the tour?" I asked.

     She gave me a sickly grin. "With me already having nausea in
the mornings?" she asked. "I'm going to be the type that takes it
hard. I'm so darned little in the first place and so excitable.
We'd meant to go ahead and have the child and starve in a garret.
And then along comes this opportunity. We'd written to the magazine
about it and sent along sample sketches. And they've accepted and
want us to start. It would all coincide neatly with baby's arrival.
I can't bounce over mountain river rapids and sleep in a pup tent
and eat when and what I can and work when I'm this way. And It's
our big chance. If we back out now, we'll get a black eye with the
magazine, especially since we've spent their advance. We've got
about two weeks, but if we postpone it any longer, there'll be
another author available. To be frank, we're about third choice
with the editor, but we were selected because we were footloose at
the right time."

     Here was a case where by a little lying I could have got the
girl into a hospital and said that the abortion was necessary. As
she said, she was in too delicate health to endure any hardships
while pregnant. She needed the best of care. And they could not
afford the best of care.


                         
                  
                               44

                

     But hospitalization would also have been beyond their means.
They told me frankly just how much money they could pay me.

     "It isn't what we can afford but what we have," the man told 
me. "I don't much like the idea of an abortion. But I don't like
the idea of taking Sally on a trip when she isn't up to it nor do
I like the idea of watching her work and suffer in a cheap lodging
house because I can't afford to buy her the proper food and take
her somewhere where she could rest and have sunlight. Later on,
when we can afford it, I'm all for having a lot of children."

     Sally was one of the most gallant patients I've ever had. She
joked about the matter and made it into an adventure.

     "I want children," she told me in a more serious moment. "And
I thought about this a lot before I came down here. I haven't any
scruples against abortions. Kent and I were just careless. I see
nothing any worse about what I'm doing than in what we did the
nights when I wasn't caught. If we had even a little money, I'd
never let poverty stop me from having this child. But it isn't fair
to either of us to let this happen now; not fair to me nor to Kent
nor to the child. If we missed this job, it might be that we'd
never have another one like it, although I think that sooner or
later we'd crash into money because we work hard and we've got a
little ability. But we'd always hold it against the child that we
lost a big job because of it. And I couldn't bear to have Kent
think that I held him back when he got his first chance and he'd
feel guilty about me. We're young and we've got plenty of time for
more children."

     The articles caught on immediately. I read every one of them.
Sally had a blithe style of writing and Kent's pictures were good.
As they predicted, the articles were put into book form and had a
good sale. Eighteen months later, Kent and Sally came into my
office. At first I didn't recognize them. They were deeply tanned,
healthy looking and were well dressed, They no longer appeared
hungry and haunted by poverty.

     Sally handed me a book, autographed by both of them. It is one
of my treasured possessions now.

     "We intended to send it to you," she said. "We were in the
East when it came out. But we meant to come back here after a while
and Kent said we'd bring it."

     Kent wanted to pay me some more money. I grinned.

     "That's the first time anyone has ever come back to make me
another payment," I told him. "Usually the return visits are to
make complaints."

     "You cut your price for us," he said. "I knew about what your
lowest charge was when we came here. I was so thankful then that
you left us a little grub-stake that I didn't say anything."

     "That's all right," I told them. "A lot of doctors charge by
the income of their patients."


                         
                  
                               45

                

     "Yeah," he grinned. "But they usually charge more than $10 and
a picture. The picture may be worth Something sometime, but you
didn't know it when you took it. Anyhow, our income is bigger now
and I want to make it right."

     "I'll just keep the picture and watch it increase in value,"
I remarked.

     As a matter of fact, later I was offered enough money for the
picture to more than make up the difference between my usual price
and what I had charged for the abortion. But I turned it down.

     "In that case," Sally said, "I want to engage you as my
physician. I'm pregnant again." Her eyes twinkled up at me. "It
seems incurable in me. But this time I'm going through with it."

     I knew that they didn't have much money even then. But they
had the start they wanted. I felt pretty good about it. I'll admit
I was a little relieved when I learned that Sally meant to have a
child. Irresponsibility can become a habit. There is an old saying
that when a woman has one abortion she will have two more. And
there's a reason for it. If the first operation is comparatively
painless and inexpensive, the woman may grow careless. Always in
the back of her mind is the thought that she can afford to take a
risk. There's an easy way out for her. That is the type of patient
I try to discourage.

     Pearl had long ago recovered from her operation. She moved to
another city, but Norma remained behind, and I continued to see
her. Pearl's lover had had his headquarters. transferred, and she
could be with him more. Two or three months after her departure,
Norma telephoned.

     "Come over and Say goodbye to me," she said.

     I was shocked. I'd gotten into the habit of dropping in to see
Norma two or three nights a week. "What's the matter?" I asked.

     Pearl has arranged a better job for me in her city."

     I hurried right over.

     "I had a job here I was hoping that you'd take," I told her as
soon as I got in the door. "I know a doctor who needs an able
assistant."

     She stared at me. "But I don't know anything about medicine."
"You know a lot about this doctor," I said. "It might mean a cut in
pay, but I wish you'd stay and marry me." She smiled. "You've hired
a wife." Later she told me that she had planned to jolt me into a
proposal. "If it didn't work, I'd have gone, of course," she told
me frankly. "Because I didn't want to stay here any longer if I
wasn't married to you. But I hoped you'd take the hint."

     She looked at me anxiously "Are you sure this isn't just a
rebound from Rose?" She asked.

 

                         
                  
                               46

                

     "No. Rose was a rebound from life. She was my calf-love affair
and my revolt against the realities, all rolled into one. This is
the real thing. I had to get over my rose-tinted spectacles stage.
It may be unfair to you. This hasn't been a glamorous courtship, by
any means."

     She laughed. "We're spared that re-adjustment, at least."

     And we were. We started with no illusions about each other.
She knew all about my profession. I knew that she had had to face
some harsh things. Our love was based on the solid foundation of
friendship. We had simply become necessary to each other.

     I'm not against glamour and romance. Every girl feels that she
has a right to a romantic courtship. But glamour is also frequently
a trick of nature to lure a girl into fulfilling her biological
duties, and sometimes it backfires.

     A Young girl came into my office late one afternoon.

     "What's the matter with you?" I asked.

     "Too much moonlight and light fiction," she replied.

     She was about 18, but she looked older and more sophisticated.
Nowadays young girls dress and act as if they knew everything, and
men are not always to be blamed if they take them at their face
value.

     Patricia, as I shall call her, told me her story with a sort
of ironical amusement, the attitude of the newly-made cynic.

     "I'd feel better if I'd been soused to the gills, Then I could
have waved my hands and said that the cad took advantage of me when
I was too drunk to know what I was doing."

     But she had been intoxicated on something headier and more
dangerous than whiskey. She'd been drunk on the idea of glamour.

     She was a debutante in a small city, Popular with boys she'd
known since childhood. Pretty and clever in a superficial way, she
imitated the mannerisms of her favorite movie stars and mouthed
risque flippancies with only a vague idea what they meant.

     Boys had tried to "paw" her, and she was a little intoxicated
with her power over them. She easily evaded their advances,
although she said she'd done a good deal of wrestling.

     "Sometimes I wanted to go ahead," she told me frankly. "But I
was always glad I hadn't when I got home."

     With three other girls, Patricia went to a resort to spend a
week. They had a cabin and no chaperon. Chaperons are out-dated
today. Anyhow, the girls were all grown and parents had become
careless.




                         
                  
                               47

                

     All the girls had vague hopes of meeting someone "really
exciting" at the resort. They were tired, they said, of the youths 
they had been going with. There was no thrill in dating boys they'd
known from childhood, boys with only a little pocket money and
their fathers' cars.

     Unfortunately for Patricia, she met an "exciting new man" at
a hotel dance. The girls' cabin was close to a resort, and they
went over without escorts.

     It was fun, Patricia thought, to dance with a stranger. She'd
been rushed by strange youths at college dances, although the man
introduced himself or was brought up by a friend. This man only
gave his first name and preserved a glamorous mystery about
himself. He was well dressed, handsome and danced well. Patricia
fell for him at once.

     Girls of that age have an unfortunate tendency to exaggerate
all their emotions. Patricia decided she had a violent crush on the
man. She went driving with him and he kissed her.

     "I'd been kissed before," she,related. "But never like that.
The boys I'd been going around with were pretty amateurish. I
didn't have sense enough to know that this was just good technique.
I thought that it was the real thing." She laughed a little. "Don't
think I'm so dumb. Men are mighty egotistical about the way they
kiss or hug a girl, but a lot of them have the idea that the thing
to do is break a girl's neck or crush her ribs and then aim in the
general direction of her mouth, This man was different. I wasn't
such an idiot as I sound in falling for him."

     She talked a good deal about it. I let her ramble on. It was
for her nerves and I want to have all the details I can before I do
anything about these cases. Success as an abortionist depends on a
lot of things, and skillful handling of the patient is necessary to
save my own neck. I must learn everything I can before I commit
myself.

     "When I was little," Patricia went on, twisting her hands
nervously, "I used to worry a lot about how I'd feel when I was
converted to the Church. I thought there'd be a great blinding
light of some kind. I thought falling in love would be about the
same thing. Well, I saw the light all right. Or rather I felt as if
I'd been shocked by a big volt of electricity.

     She sat there, a pert, lipsticked young girl with frightened
eyes. Her hair was smoothly coiffed. She was expensively dressed.
But her manicured fingers twisted constantly with a handkerchief,
wadding it and then unfolding it. The red lips trembled as she
talked.

     The money expended on her personal appearance, exclusive of
the casual jewelry she wore, must have been at least a hundred
dollars. Her parents had provided her with a good home. They spent
money lavishly on her. Yet they had neglected to prepare her for
life. Sex to her meant dates, dancing, light flirtation's and
finally marriage to the "right man" to be picked by heaven-sent 


                         
                  
                               48

                

inspiration. No one had ever told her to beware of passion, no one
had ever told her that her own emotions were unreliable, that she
carried within her enough dynamite to ruin her life. The thing that
constantly amazes me about such gals is not that they get into
trouble but that they do not get into more trouble.

     "It seemed just like something in a story," the girl went on.
"Meeting a good-looking stranger and falling in love right away. I
thought about how I'd gloat over the girls. It was just like a
movie."

     She had been unresisting in the hands of an experienced man.
The sex act had been disappointing. She was a little frightened and
yet a little thrilled at the emotion of the man. She was so sure
before that this was love that she was almost incredibly reckless.
He didn't even tell her his entire name until after her seduction.
He simply touched a match to all the stored-up longing for romance
and passion in her 18-year old body. I never laugh at jokes about
girls who don't find out the real names of their lovers beforehand.

     Patricia had agreed to go to a little cabin he said he had. It
all seemed thrilling. She had visions of herself, a gingham apron
tied over her evening dress, cooking his breakfast. It was in line
with all the silly 'stories she'd read or seen portrayed on the
screen in which the 'heroine takes refuge in the hero's cabin and
he nobly surrenders his bed and sleeps on the couch.

     This, she thought, was adventure, romance. This was heaven.

     She spent a week end with him. It was a puzzling week end, but
her faith in her lover persisted until he dumped her back at the
resort and said he hoped that he'd see her again sometime. Then the
whole thing burst upon her full force. She'd deliberately avoided
asking about several things that seemed strange and had reassured
herself by thinking of his love-making.

     In a daze, she murmured some sort of excuse, telling her
friends that she had been swept off to a house party and there'd
been no telephone or telegraph facilities. Fortunately they hadn't
notified her parents of her absence. She had meant to surprise them
with news of her whirlwind courtship and romantic marriage.

     She went home and tried to conceal her feelings. She was badly
hit. She had fallen in love head over heels, and the
disillusionment was bitter.

     She felt that she had somehow been lacking; that if she had
been prettier or more interesting or more passionate she would have
held the stranger and he would have married her. She was especially
worried about her lack of passion.

     "He kept telling me that I was a sweet child and lovable," she
said. "But I didn't want to be a sweet child. I wanted to be a
woman."





                         
                  
                               49

                

     Then one day she picked up a paper and saw the picture of her
lover. He was a notorious gangster. He had been hiding out at the 
resort. Most criminal's are careful about the women they pick up.
They've known of too many comrades betrayed, either intentionally
or unconsciously, by a girl outside the racket. Their women have to
be in the know. They must be able to keep their mouths shut when
questioned by the police; they must know who is safe and who isn't.
But some of them forget -- as newspaper headlines and pictures of
"the woman in the case" show.

     Patricia's hero, however, was notorious for similar episodes.
He could not resist a pretty face, and he preferred "nice girls."
He had left a trail of brief romances all through the Middle West.
He was handsome, usually had plenty of money, was a liberal spender
and appeared to be a wealthy young businessman on vacation.

     He was, of course, a scoundrel, and his sexual crimes were
worse than his robberies. But then a lot of factors contributed to
Patricia's private tragedy. One is that conventions have relaxed so
that introductions are no longer necessary and young girls know
little or nothing about the men they meet at parties and dances.
Another is that while mother's may warn their daughters vaguely
against strangers, there has grown up a romantic tradition of the
fascinating stranger. He is encountered in parks, taxis, at the
theater, at parties, in lonely mountain cabins, on yachts, and, he
is always at the scene of any accident. In fiction, he is
invariably chivalrous and proposes after the first kiss, In real
life, he's a risky subject.

     Patricia had not told her mother when she missed menstruation
and decided she was pregnant.

     "I can't," she said. "I'll do anything before I'll tell her.
She thinks I'm such a nice, sweet girl, and it would break her
heart. If I can keep her from finding this out, I will be a nice
girl. I've learned my lesson. But she'd never get over it. She'd
tell me that she'd rather see me dread. And she'd blame herself for
letting me go on an unchaperoned house party. She'd always be
suspicious of me afterward, She'd want to keep me under lock and
key, and she'd be asking questions all the time about my friend's.
Father would have to be told and he'd say that I've brought
disgrace on the family."

     She was crying now. I remembered the young girl who'd come to
me when I first started to practice and how she'd killed herself.
Here was my chance to wipe out that old feeling of guilt.

     "There, there," I said soothingly. "It's all right. Your
parents won't need to know anything about it." "I've got money,"
she sobbed. "I've got $200. It's my Christmas and birthday money.
And I can sell my pearls."

     "You won't need much money," I soothed her. "But you'll have
to manage to be away from home for a few days. Can you do that?"

     She nodded. Then she began to cry again.



                         
                  
                               50

                

     "I'm all right. I'm just relieved. It's been so awful, not
daring to say anything. I worried all the time even before I knew
I was overdue. And then I'd dream I was all right and wake up
believing it."

     "I know," I told her. Such dreams are common to pregnant
women, just as women who are worried about themselves may dream of
pregnancy.

     I've heard women going into orgies of self-pity over their
tragic lives when there's been sickness in the family, financial
distress and even death. And I always think of that gallant, tragic
army of young women who march into my office on leaden feet.
There's a vast difference between trouble that can be shared, and
trouble that must be kept secret.

     The real tragedies are the young Patricias, who must pretend
to be gay and guard carefully against any betrayal of their
worries. Patricia had to stand alone. She had not even dared to go
to her family doctor. She had got my name by accidentally hearing
a conversation in which a girl said that I'd arranged an abortion
for a friend "

     She had been afraid that her doctor would tell her parents. Of
course, he would have kept the secret. But it is usually less
embarrassing to go to strangers with humiliating confessions. Every
time she saw her doctor thereafter, she would be reminded of her
sordid episode.

     It would have been safer for me had I insisted that Patricia
tell the story to her parents and obtain their permission for the
abortion. Her father was prominent in the town. If anything
happened to Patricia, he would raise hell and might charge me with
anything from murder to being the father of the unborn child.
Patricia's story, sounded a little fishy, which made me trust her.
Stories that are too pat probably have been framed. The unexpected
usually happens in sex.

     Patricia was sure that her parents would object to an
abortion.

     "They wouldn't do anything but make my life miserable," she
explained. "They'd call me a murderer and they'd make me have the
child and then put it in an orphanage. An abortion doesn't seem any
worse than that. And they wouldn't believe my story. They'd think
I was shielding someone, and they'd talk day and night trying to
get me to name the man. They're old. They don't understand how I
wanted excitement and how tired I got of the nice boys who brought
me home at 10 o'clock. But believe me, I'll appreciate the nice
boys from now on."

     I didn't tell her what her parents would do to me if they
found out. She was going to keep her mouth shut. And it would have
frightened her needlessly. However, I've seen some "helping hands"
get slapped.




                         
                  
                               51

                

     A friend of mine helped his niece by marriage to get an
abortion. She was an adopted child, and the family was puritanical.
So the girl went to him, and he gave her the money and brought her
to me. Her lover was a worthless scamp who went away at the first
news of trouble.

     Several years later she died. In her possession, were papers
that revealed the story, but fortunately, not my name. However, her
uncle's connection was shown.

     There was a great uproar. The abortion had nothing to do with
the girl's death. But her relatives professed to believe that it
had "ruined" her. Furthermore, they declared the uncle must have
been the man in the case. Otherwise, why did the girl go to him
instead of her parents and why did he help her in secrecy?

     He told his story, but they did not believe him. He had no
right, they said, to take so much responsibility. His wife left
him. The name of the poor, dead girl was bandied about by the
people who had talked so loudly of their love for her.

     "Everything I ever did with or for her was raked up wrong
interpretation given it," he told me. "I loaned her my car
occasionally. She used it for dates. She may have told her folks
that she was out with me. I don't know. She was of age and I
figured she knew what she was doing. She would have gone ahead with
her affairs anyhow. And now, because she came to me when she was in
trouble, they're trying to make me out an absolute scoundrel."

     "I'd give her a drink once in a while," he went on. "She
couldn't drink at home. And I gave her cigarettes. That's dragged
out now to show that I had a tremendous affair with this girl. I
gave her the money for the abortion because she didn't have any and
she needed it at once and she couldn't think of anyone else to go
to. She knew that I had a good income and could get it for her
without much trouble. And she knew I'd keep my mouth shut about it.
She said she'd pay me back but she never got enough money together,
and she knew I didn't need it badly."

     "Calm down," I told him. "I could tell the way you behaved
when you brought her to me that you weren't responsible for it. You
were worried about the girl and you were fond of her, but I could
see that you weren't guilty, and you never tried to defend yourself
then."

     I thought of this case and what happened to my friend when I
agreed that it was best that Patricia not tell her parents. I'm not
saying that it was best. As it happened, it did turn out all right.
Patricia arranged a "trip," and instead went to a discreet
apartment hotel where she could have seclusion and be treated for
colitis.

     Naturally she was nervous as the dickens and I let her blow
off to me. She had a nurse, but she liked to talk to me. While she
was firm in her decision not to tell her mother, she fretted about
it and conducted debates with herself.



                         
                  
                               52

                

     "Mother is fine," she said, "but she worries me so with
questions about little things. Usually it's something I don't mind
telling her. But she tries to worm it out of me in a tactful
fashion and I can see through her little tricks and that annoys me.
She'll try to find out what time I came home. Instead of asking me
a direct question, she beats around the bush. She doesn't know I've
ever had a cocktail and she disapproves of my smoking. And she
talks about my boy friends in such a silly, areh way that it keeps
me from being honest about my dates."

     "I know," I said. "All mothers and daughters -- or most of
them -- go through the same stage. The mother can't become adjusted
to the idea that her daughter has a right to private thoughts and
a private life."

     Sometimes I've thought it would be a good thing if mothers
could hear some of the things their daughter's tell me -- and I get
the cases where the mothers apparently have made a failure of their
job. I told Patricia that.

     "I don't think it would do any good," she replied, "It might
change mother in the long run. But she'd be hurt at first because
I didn't talk to her instead of a doctor. I can't treat mother like
a human being. She's always reminding me that she's my mother, and
so I must give everything she says special consideration. For
instance, if I do something silly, just a little harmless thing, I
can't tell mother about it and laugh. She will give me a lecture
from a sense of duty. Even if I know I made a fool of myself and
admit it, she's still got to go motherly on me."

     If mother's could only learn to graduate their supervision
through the teens and concentrate on the bigger things, I'd lose a
lot of my business but I'd be thankful to do it. But they are so
accustomed to commanding their children's lives, from what time
they go to bed and get up to what they eat and wear and think, that
they can't get used to the idea that their children now have minds
of their own and that these minds must be respected.

     Patricia's mother was fairly typical of a certain class of
well-to-do women. Of course, Patricia's case was unusual in that
she met an utter rotter. But she might have received virtually the
same treatment at the hands of a jaded businessman on vacation at
a resort and a little plastered. Or she might have been knocked up
by a reckless school boy who would be too frightened to be of any
help. Such lads get panicky, try to evade the blame and in so doing
spread the story and do the girl more harm. They rush to their
parents, deny everything and the story is circulated that way.

     Patricia's mother lost her daughter's confidence because she
failed to give the girl the same friendliness and tolerance that
she would give some one not a relative. She expected perfection
from her daughter, and even the most modest mothers seem to think
that this perfection can be attained by implicit obedience.
Maternal orders usually are so vague or so contradictory that the
daughter finally ignores them altogether and begins a series of
minor deceptions which can never be ended because confession of one
of them would cause the mothers to become suspicious or to discover
the others.

                         
                  
                               53

                

     "Mother is always telling me to be like Mary Warren, and she's
a pill." Patricia said. "She never gets to go anywhere. Or she
tells me to be like some girl who plays up to the chaperons and
gets away with murder on the sly. She never gives me any practical
advice. She just tells me to be a nice girl and to associate only
with nice boys and girls and gives me a lot of platitudes. She told
me once that I shouldn't let boys kiss me. But all the girls pet a
little, and if I didn't I wouldn't go anywhere."

     "She never told me anything about --" Patricia stopped rather
than use any words for sexual intercourse. "She always says that
she'll tell me more about thing's at the proper time. I suppose she
means when I marry. She just says for me not to do anything bad.
But this didn't seem bad when I did it. I couldn't help It. Or I
thought I couldn't. I got all dizzy when Darrell started kissing
me, and then I was weak and burning all over."

     It sounds almost unbelievable that there could be girls as
innocent as Patricia in the world today. But there are. Some of the
girls who tell risque jokes so glibly are almost as ignorant of the
volcanic properties of sex.

     Patricia went home a sadder and wiser girl. As far as I know,
she never told her mother about her experience. Later she married
a young bank clerk whose chief characteristic seemed to be
placidity. She had lost her taste for excitement and wanted the
prosaic.

     A mother I consider far above the average in intelligence told
me that she had been criticized by her neighbors for bringing the
confessions magazines home and allowing her daughter's to read
them.

"The literary standard may not be high and the stories may be
written by staff members," she remarked. "I don't mind that. We
have plenty of good books in the house to offset any lowering of
literary standards. I told my girls the facts of life as early as
I thought they would understand them. I was criticized for that,
too, because the neighboring mothers were still favoring the stork
theory and the doctor's black bag, and they were peeved because my
children explained the processes of nature to their youngsters. But
I never saw any reason for lying to children if I could keep from
it.

     "I've had mothers say they didn't wish their children to read
the newspapers because they were so full of scandal. It's my
experience that adolescents don't read the newspapers enough. I
encourage that. I may be robbing my children of the bloom of
innocence, but when my oldest boy has a hangover he tell's me so
with a sheepish look and I fix him a pick-up and he doesn't need a
lecture. I know he's going to do a little drinking and I want to
know what he drinks and see that he doesn't make too big a fool of
himself. I won't find out if I try the heavy mother act. I let him
give beer parties at the house and I don't sit around telling the
boys how nice it is that they come and how I want to know all
Jimmy's little friends. That went out after his 10th birthday. I
tell them that the house is theirs, but not to break any furniture.


                         
                  
                               54

                

I encouraged Jimmy to start dating when he was young because I
figured he'd be safer with a nice girl than he would be hanging
around pool halls or running the streets with a gang of sensation-
hunting boys. I had his father give him a lecture on diseases and
dangers of picking-up girls, too, with no mincing of words about
it.

     "I told my girls the same thing. I don't want them to think
that sex is a sordid matter, but I do want them to be able to
distinguish between cheap thrills and genuine affection when it
comes. I don't want my girls to be manhandled and overkissed. But
I want them to do enough kissing that they won't be swept off their
feet the first time anyone puts any enthusiasm in the embrace. I
gossip with them, too, for that's an easy way of putting in my
opinions without a formal lecture on the style of 'Now mother wants
to tell her little girls something.' It's just as foolish to let a
teen-age girl remain ignorant of the dangers of sex as it is to let
her go motoring without warning her of the dangers of drunken
driving."

     "How is it working out?" I asked.

     "Fine," she said. "I have to catch myself from relating to
neighbor mothers some facts about their dear, pure daughters that
my girls have told me. They're still trying to keep that virgin
bloom on the theory that the girls will be more attractive brides
in the marriage market. But if my prospective sons-in-law are going
to be frightened away because my daughters know the detail's of
their anatomy and the difference between a marriage proposal and a
proposition, they can remain away. They'll find out all the facts
sooner or later and I'd prefer that they find out from me. That
way, I know they'll learn the truth and not a distorted version
from some girl friend. It's easier for them to hear it from me, and
they won't be afraid of shocking me with confidences. I want them
to talk easily to me. If ever any of them need your services,
doctor," she concluded with a smile, "I'll be right along. But I
don't think they will."

     And they haven't either. If more mothers were like Mrs. X, the
world would be a better place for everyone except abortionists.
Some of the young girls who come to me have been warned
sufficiently about the dangers of sex but in such garbled fashion
that they received no practical information and sex held a morbid
fascination for them. Some of them were frightened to death after
they had their first sex experience. But when nothing happened,
they recovered from their scare. They were excited over their
initiation into womanhood and they went to extremes. Their mothers
had tried to control them by fright rather than reason. When fright
left, there was no longer any deterrent.

     "I try to make chastity something besides just a word to my
daughters," Mrs. X said. "There are so many jokes about chastity
and the scarcity of virgins that the mere terms are not enough to
do any good. Common sense and good taste must be added.





                         
                  
                               55

                

     "I tell them that they're pretty girls and a lot of men are
going to want them. But they must have a yardstick to measure the 
men and they must think of the future. You can't expect girls to do
much reasoning when a man is making love to them. But if you can
get them to ask themselves if they would want to marry this man,
you have a foundation for good behavior. If he's attractive enough
to be considered seriously as a husband, then the girl should not
risk losing marriage by an affair. If he's not husband-material,
he's not good enough to be taken as a casual lover. My girls must
learn to make their own decisions, but they must have something on
which to base their judgment. Just telling them to go around with
nice men and to behave isn't enough."

     She is right. Some of the mothers who come weeping into my
office wondering why their daughters failed to follow their advice
were always careful to tell their girls to be "nice."

     Even when confronted with evidence of their failures, many
such mothers resent any insinuation that they did not follow the
wisest course. They have the excuse of the weakling, "I did the
best I could." The favorite alibi is, "My children won't listen to
me any more," These mothers never pause to wonder why their
children won't listen to them.

     Patricia's mother undoubtedly would have wrung her hands and
justified herself by saying, "But how could I know that Pat would
meet a horrible gangster?"

     How could she know Pat wouldn't meet a gangster? She knew
there were such things. Pat might have received worse treatment. At
least, she didn't get a disease. How could she know her glamour-
seeking daughter might not meet a blackmailer who would drug her
and photograph her nude in an obscene pose? Girls of some of the
best families have been treated in such fashion. How could she know
that her daughter wouldn't meet some diseased and reckless youth
who thought it smart to give a girl a dose or to knock her up! How
could she know that Pat might not meet some man with emotions so
jaded that his ardor could only be aroused by fresh young purity or
a pervert seeking new converts? How could she be so blindly
optimistic as to think that a young girl guided only by platitudes
would reach the altar without a single misstep along the way?

                   IX. SOME TRAGEDY AND COMEDY

     All my cases do not have happy endings. A young country girl
was brought to me by her father. She was a rather attractive girl,
but sensitive about her "country" look. She had gone to a town
high-school and had been embarrassed by her sunburned skin, her
work-roughened hands, her faded and old-fashioned dresses. She had
no mother, and she had to work hard. Her father was a prosperous
farmer, but it never occurred to him to hire a girl to do the
housework while his daughter went to school.

     As a consequence, his daughter was always a little harassed by
the conflict between her housework, her studying and her school
days. She had little time to devote to her personal appearance,
even if she had possessed money and taste to buy clothes. I tell 
this because it was important from the standpoint of what happened
to her.
                         
                  
                               56

                

     Small town's are more snobbish than cities, because lines are
more sharply visible. The daughters of the town's leading families
sneered at Kate. And most of the other girls toadied to them. So
she was deprived of the normal girl companionship of high-school.
She had no chum with whom to discuss her crushes, and, anyhow, she
had no time for walking arm in arm around the town after school,
going to basketball and football games, having sodas in the drug
store.

     This lack of time would seem to prevent her from getting into
trouble. But, instead, it had the opposite effect. She was So
hungry for any sort of companionship that she proved a "pushover"
for the small-town toughs. The high-school boys did not think it
necessary to treat a "green country girl" with any respect or to
ask her on regular dates and parties. One of the boys took her home
one night from a play and "made" her. She was flattered because he
came from a "good" family, and she was too dumb to realize that he
was treating her like an unpaid prostitute. He had several similar
"dates" with her, usually leaving her immediately after --
sometimes making her walk home. Presently she learned that she was
pregnant.

     Her father found her weeping one day and forced her to tell
him the story. She concealed the name of the boy from him and she
refused to tell me. I gathered, however, from talking to her that
she had been with several boys. I think she knew which one of them
was to blame, but he had apparently threatened her with something,
and so she protected him. Probably he used the old trick of telling
her that he would deny everything and that he would prove she had
gone with other boys.

     She maintained a sullen, frightened silence most of the time
she was in my office. Her father wanted me to get the man's name
from her so that he could either horsewhip him or force him to
marry Kate.

     "He won't marry me, papa," the girl said. "I told you that.
Ain't no use trying."

     The girl was diseased, too, and I refused to risk an abortion.

     "I can cure the disease," I told her father. "Then perhaps you
can send her away somewhere to have the child."

     He grunted, and they left. Several days later I heard that the
girl had hanged herself from a rafter in the barn loft. Maybe it
was for the best. Life would have been a pretty dismal business if
she had had to remain in the same community. Fundamentally she was
a decent girl. She had simply been the victim of cheap small-town
toughs and a social system. Probably she was wise in not telling
her father the names of her lovers -- although that is a strange
word to use in such a case. The boy to blame might have been
frightened into a shotgun marriage. But if he were under age, the
marriage could be annulled by his parents. There would be an ugly
quarrel in which the girl's name would be drugged deeper into the
filth and the whole incident made unforgettable.



                         
                  
                               57

                

     I saw that happen in another small-town case. The boy, a son
of the local banker, was called "wild," but I have a more blunt
term for youths of his type. He was spoiled by too much money, too
much prestige. For several years there were rumors of how he had
tried to assault various girls, but they were kept quiet for fear
of parental wrath. The banker could make things financially
embarrassing for a great many people. The boy behaved himself
fairly well around girls of his own set.

     Then he seduced the daughter of a widow. "Seduced" is the
proper term, for I believe he led her to believe that he meant to
marry her. Perhaps he didn't say so in so many words, but he told
her that he loved her, and to her 16-year-old mind that meant
marriage.

     He bragged to all the town youth of his conquest of a virgin.
Some of the other boys tried to follow in his footsteps, but had no
luck. Then the girl became Pregnant. She went to the boy and asked
that their marriage be hurried. He took the refuge of such sexual
cowards. He said that he was not to blame, refused to believe that
she had been faithful to him and even that she had been a virgin.

     She was a delicate little thing with an Irish beauty, smoky
gray eyes, black curls and a fair skin with a few freckles
scattered over her nose. Ordinarily she was shy, but desperation
lent her new courage. She tried to see the boy's mother. She
failed, but the boy heard of it and got the wind up, He went to his
father and told him that the girl was trying to force him into
marriage. He painted the girl as a fortune hunter, knowing this the
most powerful appeal to his money-mad parent.

     The banker was enthusiastic about his Son's plan of getting
other boys to swear that they, too, had intercourse with the girl,
Bessie, and that she had not been a virgin at the time. Then the
father went to Bessie's mother and accused her of trying to marry
her daughter to his son. This was the first the amazed woman had
beard of the whole thing. She knew Bessie had been dating the
banker's son, but she thought it just a boy and girl friendship.

     For once, a mother remained loyal. Usually it seems to me that
those whose love and faith should be bulwarks for our younger
generation are the first to believe any rumors about their beloved
offspring. I've had girls fell me that their mothers accused them
of immorality if they stayed out late at night, and refused to
believe their explanation of tardiness. Some of these girls
eventually decided that they might as well play the game if they
were to get the blame.

     But Bessie's mother, Mrs. G, refused to believe the banker's
lurid tale of how Bessie had been playing fast and loose with the
town boys and was now trying to fasten the blame on his innocent
son. Part of her loyalty may have sprung from the banker's misstep
in including her in the accusation. He blamed her for plotting the
whole business and using her daughter as a willing tool.





                         
                  
                               58

                

     Mrs. G. also refused to believe that her daughter had been
intimate with any boy other than the banker's son. Bessie told her 
the whole thing, and she upheld her daughter. The town was in an
uproar. The widow and her daughter were requested to leave. A
friend of Mrs. G's brought her to me.

     "I wouldn't want my daughter to marry a boy like that, even if
he were willing," she said. "What kind of a life could she lead
with him after this? And I certainly don't want her to have a child
by him. He isn't fit to be a father. I don't want any of his money,
and I don't want my daughter to have a child that would be
supported by such horrible people. I'm going to leave the town and
I want to get rid of the child. But X isn't going to get off by
paying me a little money."

     In the general uproar, some of the boys revealed -- in
youthful boasts -- how they had lied about Bessie and how young X
had bragged that Bessie was a virgin. The banker soon saw that he
had stirred up a hornet's nest. The whole story came out, and was
whispered throughout the community. The banker's enemies took
delight in spreading it. Finally he tried to buy off the widow. She
refused any of his money, even enough to pay for the abortion. The
banker's son was shipped off to a military academy.

     The girl got her abortion. I saw to that. There was no time
for arguing over who was to pay for it and who wasn't. I admired
the widow's spunk in refusing the money that, according to any
code, her daughter was entitled to. It was her best way of refuting
charges that she was trying to gold-dig or blackmail the banker.
She had to leave the town, of course, for the girl's sake. But she
was not entirely unavenged.

     I don't mean to paint all small towns as dens of iniquity
where a poor girl is never safe. If I exaggerate, it is simply that
I hear few tales of sweetness and light in my office.

     Shortly after the case of Mrs. G, I got exactly the opposite.
A designing mother accused the son of a prominent man of seducing
her daughter. The son denied it, and the father believed him. They
forced the girl to have an examination, which proved that she was
a virgin.

     In my business, you soon learn that truth about sex is
stranger than fiction. A prosecuting attorney told me of a 10-year-
old girl who came into his office with her mother. The child's
parents were divorced and she divided her time between them.

     The father lived on a farm. The girl didn't like it, and she
wrote her mother making accusations of incest against her father.
The mother rushed to her, and then went to the prosecutor to file
charges against her former husband and to obtain complete custody
of the child.

     "The kid acted mighty funny," the attorney told me. "I could
see that she didn't like to live in the country. She was used to
town, where she could go to movies and have plenty of playmates. So
I had the county physician examine her. Sure enough, he found no 


                         
                  
                               59

                

signs that she'd been ravished. The kid then admitted that she'd
made the whole story up so that she could go back to her mother. I
told the mother that she'd better drop the charges and work out
some friendly agreement with her ex-husband.

     He sighed. "Attorneys and doctors hear some queer things" he
said philosophically.

     He was right. When people ask the secret of my marital
happiness I say that I see enough tragedy in my office and I
learned my lessons without any experiments at home.

     A colleague of mine told me about a prominent woman who was
trying to divorce her husband. She told all her friends he was
impotent. Just as they succeeded in agreeing on a friendly charge,
she became pregnant.

     I don't know how she managed her divorce, but it probably was
an embarrassing situation. My colleague laughed heartily. I didn't.
For a somewhat similar case was brought to me.

     "I'm planning to divorce my husband," the woman, whom I shall
call Janet said. "I'm going to marry another man. And now to throw
a monkey wrench into the works, I am pregnant."

     "Well," I told her, "if you're planning to marry the man, go
ahead and have the child. You can get the divorce in Reno in plenty
of time. It may be a bit embarrassing, but that's one of the risks
you took. You and your lover will just have to face the music."

     "You don't understand," she said. "My husband is the father of
the child."

     With difficulty I restrained a grin. "That does make it a
problem."

     "I can't go through with it," she explained desperately. "You
see, it's like this. I'm divorcing my husband because of
infidelity. We've been married about five years and I see there's
no hope of changing his ways. He's fond of me but he can't resist
women -- and they can't resist him. I don't think these affairs
mean much to him -- but they mean a lot to me."

     Janet paused for a few moments, searching for words. I waited.
You can't just walk into a doctor's office -- unless he's an out-
and-out quack -- and demand an abortion. All these confessions may
sound a bit queer, but if a doctor has any standing at all, he has
to be convinced that for the sake of humanity this case is worth
taking a risk.

     "I stood it as long as I could," she said. "Finally I was
forced to realize that such a marriage would drive me crazy. I like
security. I want to be respectable. Don made me feel casual,
unimportant. I was his wife, but there was nothing that we had that
he didn't share with any woman of uneasy virtue. It was killing my
love and my self respect. I was tormented by jealousy at first, and
then I found myself becoming a little resigned. But I never knew 


                         
                  
                               60

                

when he'd meet some woman who'd make a fuss. One or two of his
flames did come to me and demand that I give Don up to them. Don
was horrified at that. He liked being married to me -- because it
gave him plenty of freedom. But I hate scenes."

     "And then," Janet went on. "I met Andy. I admit I poured it on
a little about being the misunderstood wife. Andy was sympathetic,
and we fell in love with each other. With Andy I could have
everything I want, security, comfort. I could be an actual wife. He
is steady-going and he has high ideals. If I lose Andy, I'll
probably try the dismal experiment of becoming a philandering wife.
I'm not cut out for that sort of thing and I'd make a mess of it."

     "I know," I told her. I'd 'seen plenty of women driven to
extramarital affairs by unfaithful husbands. Frequently it wrecks
their marriages because the husbands never feel that anything they
have done justifies the same action in their wives.

     "Andy and I agreed that I should get a divorce," Janet
continued. "I put off telling Don about it. I know Andy won't
understand that. He's a matter-of-fact person who makes a decision
and sticks to it. And he couldn't understand how I could still be
fond of Don and hate to hurt him, even if he has hurt me a lot in
the past. Finally I just left the traditional note on the pin
cushion and departed."

     "And then?" I asked.

     "And then I discover I'm pregnant." She shrugged her
shoulders. "I've got to do something about it, and I didn't want to
try any crude things that might keep me from bearing Andy's
children. It's so early that it should be simple. But you can see
my position. I could never make Andy understand that after I had
agreed to a divorce I would take my husband as a lover. I've
thought of all the possible reasons and none of them would be
credible to Andy. He'd feel that I didn't really love him -- and I
do. He'd think it my duty to stay with Don if I loved him enough to
go to bed with him, and he'd think me utterly a hussy if I told him
I didn't want to live with Don any more."

     "And why did you do it?" I asked.

     "I don't know." Janet flung her hands up. "Why do we do
anything? Why did I marry Don when I knew pretty well what he was
then? I did it because he was so attractive to me that I felt I'd
rather risk a little unhappiness than lose him entirely. And oddly
enough I'm still a little fond of him. We've lived together five
years. It's hard to wipe all of that out. To be honest," she turned
and faced me, "I think it was more or less force of habit. He came
into my room late at night when I was asleep, and the next thing I
knew he was making love to me. That was always Don's way of
starting a reconciliation after he'd been unfaithful. And I had
submitted to him before when I was angry or sad, and, anyhow, there
wasn't time to think. I suppose I could have made a scene and told
Don I meant to divorce him. But the fact remains that I didn't.




                         
                  
                               61

                

     "Maybe there was a little sentimentalism about it, too. A
desire to have one pleasant night with Don before our life was
closed entirely. Anyhow, he stayed the rest of the night with me,
and I didn't use any preventives. And, of all the nights, it had to
be that one on which I was caught. I once wanted a child thinking
it would help me hold Don. Later, I decided it would be bad because
Don didn't care for children; he would assuredly be unfaithful
while I was pregnant and I would hate that and the child would make
me even more helpless. Now, just as I had put an end to the whole
dismal mess, this had to happen."

     "Don't you think you ought to tell Andy the truth?" I asked.

     "What is the truth?" Janet asked. "That I, being still a wife
in name, did not refuse my husband? I can't ask Andy to marry me
when I'm carrying Don's child. It would be an impossible situation.
If the child already were born, it would be different. He might not
object to a two or three-year-old child, although Andy is great on
doing his duty and there would be difficulty about the custody of
the child. But I couldn't go to him like this. There would be jokes
-- he'd be suspected of being the father, of course. It might
seriously hurt, his business career if there was scandal."

     "Can't you blame it on Andy?" I asked.

     She shook her head. "He's too honorable. We haven't been
lovers, and he won't take me until we're married. I know; I've
offered myself to him.

     "He isn't as much of a prig as I've made him out to be. Just
as I suppose I've given Don a little too much of the worst of it in
talking to Andy. A woman probably would understand how I
automatically let my husband make passionate love to me when I was
half-asleep. And she could understand how, even when I had decided
it was impossible for me to live with Don any longer, I could have
a sort of affection for him, a remembrance of our honeymoon days
and early married life and the fun we have had together, that would
make it pleasant, even more pleasant when I thought that it would
be our last time together."

     "I know," I said. "Over-compensation. You find it in men and
women who are being unfaithful or have decided to separate. The
guilty person feels that he or she has taken something important
away from the other mate and by way of compensation lavishes
tenderness on them."

     She nodded. "But Andy's never been married, and I'm afraid
he's never had any really passionate love affairs. I say I'm
afraid, because I'll probably make a lot of little slips, such as
calling him Don or talking about Don without rancor. But he's what
I want, and he's what I need. I'm not going to let Don or Don's
unexpected child cheat me out of it."

     Here was a neat problem. She could have gone back to Don. She
had not committed adultery, and she said Don would take her back,
although he did not seem greatly upset over. her desertion.



                         
                  
                               62

                

     "He fancies I'll come back of my own free will if he lets me
alone," she said. "And he's too lazy to exert himself. Out of sight
is out of mind with Don. If he happened to meet me he'd probably
make an eloquent little speech urging me to return and saying he is
broken-hearted. But if he doesn't see me, he'll let the whole thing
slide and besides he might take the attitude that the child is
Andy's and I've been jilted by Andy. He couldn't understand Andy's
attitude in not making passionate love to me. Anyhow, as I said, I
don't want to go back to Don."

     Perhaps she should have told Andy. After all, the child was
not illegitimate. She was not disgraced. She had made Andy no
promises. Janet was not a loose woman. But, as she said, a bachelor
of Andy's type could not realize how after several years of
marriage sex becomes more or less automatic. Don, of course, was
innocent of blame in that particular instance. He did not know that
Janet was planning a friendly divorce. The interlude did not change
Janet's mind. She merely regarded it as the close of her sex life
with Don, and she felt that it was really no more of an infidelity
to Andy than any similar experience she had had with Don since she
had met Andy.

     On the surface, it looked as if she should take it on the chin
and go through what would simply be an embarrassing situation;
perhaps wait until after the child was born before she got her
divorce. She was still fond of Don and perhaps she should take up
her married life again. That probably would be the viewpoint of the
moralists,

     But Janet was not stupid about herself or her condition.

     "My pregnancy is an accident occurring at the worst time," she
said. "I'm not dumb enough to think that it was an act of God at a
dramatic moment to keep Don and me together. Don doesn't want
children. I want them, but I don't want Don's. If I stayed with
him, I should hate the child, hate myself for being a darned fool
and hate Don for getting me into this fix, although it really isn't
his fault. I'd think that his selfish desire to have me when he
wanted me ruined my life. I'd reached the limit of endurance in my
present existence. If I felt that sex had cheated me out of my
chance for happiness, I'd fling my cap over the windmill for good
and try to outdo Don. Then things would be in a mess."

     So she got her abortion. Then she obtained a quiet divorce and
married Andy. They seem very happy. She has never told him of the
incident. I think she is wise. She understands him as well as one
person can understand another. And so she knows there are certain
things that he could never understand.

     A second husband or wife is always vaguely jealous of the
first. A second wife was pregnant, and came to me -- not for an
abortion -- but for other medical advice. As it happened, she had
had an abortion before marriage.

     "I've never told David about it and I won't," she said. "He
talks to me a good deal about his first wife and that's bad enough
without my chiming in with tales of my past lovers. If he were 
jealous, it would be bad, and if he weren't, it would be worse. I 

                         
                  
                               63

                

tried asking David not to talk about Alice, his first wife, but he
looked surprised and hurt and said one of the nicest things about
me was that he could talk about such things freely. He doesn't see
any danger in it, because he knows that it is all over. But I am
forced to realize that he must once have been very fond of Alice
and wonder if his affection for me will dwindle just as quickly.
Also, I can't keep from feeling somehow that his first wife had the
best of it. She had him when he was youthful and idealistic and
more romantic than he is now. Of course, I know that my marriage is
safer because my husband wasn't romantic and impulsive when he
selected me. All the same, I wince, when he talks of some youthful
and quixotic thing he did with her."

     The more I see of the mistakes made in sex, the less I think
of the noble idea of a man and woman telling everything in their
pasts before marriage. Of course, if there is something that the
husband is sure to find out, such as a previous marriage or a
scandal that will be immediately resurrected, then the woman had
better beat the gossips to it.

     "When I became engaged, my husband began asking a lot of
question's, in a joking way," a woman once told me. "He smiled, but
he was serious behind his light manner. I hadn't given him an
opening by asking him about his past. I didn't want to know about
it. I knew he was virile and he was not diseased. I liked him for
himself, not for any record as a Casanova or a monk. So after I had
answered or evaded several questions, I said, Look, John, if you
want virginal innocence in a bride you have asked the wrong woman
to marry you. I'm not a virgin and you'd be sorry if, at my age, I
were. I have done a few things in my life that I regret and very
few that I'm ashamed of. Probably I've been a fool at times, as who
hasn't? But I've a sense of loyalty to the men who've been in my
past and I'm not going to talk about them. I took my affairs
seriously then or I wouldn't have gone through with them and they
deserve some reticence now.'"

     "What did he say?" I asked.

     "He was a little offended at first," she replied. "I told him
that I hadn't asked him any questions because I thought that a man
I loved would naturally be all right. I thought I deserved the same
faith. I was 30 years old when I married. It would have been odd if
there had been no men in my life. Some of the men had asked me to
marry them. One of my former lovers still lived in my town. Had I
told John all about my past, it would have risen to haunt me from
time to time. John would have looked at my former men friends with
jealous and prejudiced eyes. He would have suspected me of
lingering affection for my former lover. Or he might have thought
that I was regretting not having married some more prosperous man.
Then he would never understand the accidents."

     "Accidents?" I asked.

     She nodded. "Yes, accidents. He'd think they were planned or
I was weak or something was wrong, although he probably has had the
same type of experiences. I mean things like going somewhere and
having the car or the motorboat break down and staying the night. 


                         
                  
                               64

                

Maybe you just sleep. Maybe you sleep together. I'll give you an
example. A man and I went on an all-day picnic to a cabin omened by
some mutual friends. The whole thing, I warn you, sounds like a
plot for a romance except for the ending. We went in a car. when we
started the man said, 'Now remind me to get some gasoline.' I
agreed. Well, it was one of those trips when you whiz past a
filling station and the driver says, 'I should have stopped there,'
and by that time you're a mile on down the road and you wait for
the next one. Finally we ran out of stations because we were in a
wooded country and off the highway. Jack thought we had enough
gasoline to get us there and back to civilization. There wasn't
anything. deliberate about it. We were just careless."

     I grinned. "So you ran out of gas."

     She nodded again. "We didn't discover it until we got ready to
go home. We'd spent a perfectly congenial day, had our picnic,
walked around, admired the views and it was dark when we started to
go back. The car wouldn't start. I was dead tired. So was Jack.
Something had gone wrong with the gasoline gauge. It showed about
two gallons. Jack looked at me and laughed and we decided to stay
there. The next morning Jack could hunt around for a farmhouse. It
seemed utterly silly to go barging around in the dark when there
was a snug cabin stocked with wood and groceries.

     "Plausible enough," I agreed.

     "Yes. But here comes the part that is hard to explain to a man
you're about to marry. I'd met Jack about three years before had
been attracted to him. But he was going with someone else then and
so was I, and nothing came of it. About a week or so before the
picnic, I'd met Jack again. He was just back from a long trip, and
he gave me a rush. I wasn't going with anyone in particular. We'd
done a little petting, nothing else.

     "Jack hadn't been with a woman for months. The inevitable
happened. I liked and respected Jack. He was very attractive
physically. But I wasn't in love with him and he wasn't in love
with me and we didn't pretend to be. I like to look back on the
episode as being an adventure. The next morning, we found a tin of
gasoline in the back of a woodshed. If we'd rummaged around a
little more or had a flashlight we'd probably have found it the
night before. We laughed, but both of us said that we were glad we
hadn't discovered it."

     "And you don't intend to tell your husband about it?" I asked.

     "No," she replied. "You see Jack and I had a couple more dates
and then his business took him away, probably forever. If he'd
stayed, we might have had a long love affair; we might even have
been married by now. I don't know. I've heard men say that when two
nice people meet and have a powerful physical attraction the thing
to do is, well, to do something about it. But I once ruined a
beginning love affair by telling this story to the man. He had told
me of experiences which seemed much more casual to me. But it
ruined his idealistic view of me, and he couldn't bear that."



                         
                  
                               65

                

     "So I learned my lesson," she concluded briskly. "I've thought
a lot about that since. I was going to be frank and straightforward
with that man. I was being idealistic when I told him about Jack.
I thought the man was so fine and understanding that he deserved
nothing less than the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth. I thought he'd appreciate my frankness and my confidence. I
should have known better. He was extremely jealous, and in his
jealousy he said things that hurt. Afterward he felt that he'd made
a fool of himself and he tried to salve his vanity by convincing
himself I was not what he had thought. This is getting a little
complicated. But it was a matter of his egotism. He took it calmly
when I first told him, and afterward he started thinking of it and
began to get more jealous; and he exploded and insisted I had done
an awful thing, so he could excuse his own spasm."

     "I agree with you," I said. "There are only a few things any
woman needs to tell her husband. I think she should say whether she
had been married before or that she doesn't really love him and
loves someone that she can't marry for some reason. Then she should
tell him if she can't have children, if she doesn't like children
or if she has a child already. I mean, of course, an illegitimate
child whose existence is being concealed. Chances are, he'll find
out about the child later and then it will be worse. And she should
tell him if there is anything wrong with her physically so that she
can't do her share in the sex partnership. That seems to me all the
information any woman needs to or should give her husband and all
any husband needs to give his wife. I include abortions in the list
of things she doesn't need to tell him, unless there is a big
chance that he may find out about it or unless the job has been
bungled so that she can't have children."

     There has always seemed something grisly and morbid to me
about raking over the past just as a marriage is about to begin. It
is unhealthy emotionally. Why drag out the dead on the eve of a
wedding? It turns it into a wake. An emotional woman probing into
the past may become upset and wonder if she's doing the right thing
or start thinking of what might have been. Likewise, tiny doubts of
the other person must creep in after detailed reminiscences of the
past.

     A young girl came to me for a physical examination before her
marriage.

     "I'm going to have a clean bill of health for my husband at
any rate," she told me. "If I'm pronounced sound of wind and limb
and technically a good girl I think that's enough. I'm not going to
drag out the love letters. I burn them as soon as I get them,
anyhow. And any girl past her middle 20's is a fool if she
confesses her life and loves; If she's been at all popular it's
going to sound pretty over-whelming to the gentleman in love with
her, and if she hadn't been popular, she doesn't want him to know
it."

     She smiled at me. "Some girls get too modern. But it isn't
modern to know when to keep your mouth shut. Our grandmothers knew
plenty about maidenly reticence. The trouble with the modern girl
is not so much what she does but her habit of talking about it at 
the top of her voice."

     Which seemed words of wisdom to a man in my profession.

                               66

                

                     X. MY WIFE LENDS A HAND

     Ordinarily, as I have said, I tried to keep Norma separate
from my professional life. Of course, I talked over my cases with
her and frequently I relied upon her decisions.

     When we were first married, she wanted to act as my office
girl.

     "It would save you money," she insisted. "Then you'd need only
a nurse for operations. I could keep books and answer the telephone
and sterilize instruments as well as a nurse could."

     I shook my head. "No. I've found out by now that most of the
old platitudes are true. One of them is that you can't touch pitch
without being defiled. I don't want you to come in daily contact
with the most sordid side of sex. One of the nicest things about
our marriage is that I can look forward to coming home at night and
finding you serene and lovely. I can talk over anything that
bothers me, but you haven't been upset by seeing these people and
hearing their stories."

     She laughed. "Darling, don't think I don't hear about sex just
because I keep away from your office. When two women get together,
the conversation goes from clothes and diet to its logical end of
sex."

     I grinned. "I didn't know. I know that women talk to me mostly
of sex, but in a strictly professional way."

     "I went to a bridge luncheon today," Norma said. "And we got
to talking about abortions and miscarriages. Don't look shocked.
These were all nice women. It just happened that one of them had
had an operation. She said it was a curettage to stop a hemorrhage,
but we were all a little suspicious, I think. Anyway the
conversation turned to Women Who Do Things. And such a lot of
gossip as you wouldn't hear in days, I heard that Doctor B does
abortions, too. I didn't know that before."

     "I don't know it yet," I answered. "Doctor B might do one for
a close friend, but I rather doubt it. He'd probably send the
friend to me or to another doctor here who has some shady practice.
Don't believe all you hear about such matters. A lot of women who
come to me thought that they could persuade their family physicians
to help them out of jams, but they were mistaken when it came to a
showdown."

     "I know," she said. "Women will say something as rumor and
when it's next repeated it's a fact and next time it's doubled. For
instance, some one told me that Mrs. G had had three abortions."

     I grinned again. "Mrs, G had an operation several years ago
that would prevent her having any children. She had a tumor, and
she didn't menstruate for some time. What happened was that the
tumor made her abdomen enlarged and there were rumor's that she was
pregnant. Since she didn't have any children, a lot of gossip-
minded women supposed that she was doing something about it."


                         
                  
                               67

                

     "That's what I suspected. But you know I hadn't been around
married women much before I married. I am still a little amazed at
the way the wives all seize a chance to talk about sex. I suppose
they feel that this is one of the privileges of wifehood, to drop
all reticence in such matters, and they make the most of it.
Before, they had to be careful, for nice, unmarried girls aren't
supposed to know about such things."

     "That's why my practice grows," I remarked flippantly. "But a
lot of married women don't know very much about sex, and that
causes trouble when they go to dishing out advice. A woman who has
escaped having more than one or two children, chiefly through luck,
isn't in a position to give much advice to a woman who doesn't want
them."

     "I'm very popular," Norma said, "because they know I'm a
doctor's wife and they all figure they can get some free
information as well as a lot of gossip from me. I just tell them
that my husband never discusses his cases with me. But I was
surprised at how much talk, true or otherwise, there is floating
around about women. If a woman has a bad time at menstruation, half
her friends jump to the conclusion that she's had a miscarriage.
And if she has an abdominal operation, everyone wants to know if
she had her ovaries removed. If she did, a lot of women think she
probably was diseased or she didn't want children. And how they
dwell on the detail's of their menopauses."

     I grinned. "Maybe you'd better come to the office, where the
air is pure and clean and disinfected."

     "I Almost burst out laughing at one fat woman," Norma told me.
"She has two children, and she said that when she knew she was
pregnant the second time she was so irritated. I got so mad at
Frank that I just went out and jumped off the porch two or three
times, she said. 'But it didn't do any good. Of course, I don't
think it's right to do anything about such things.'"

     "What she meant," I interrupted, "was that she didn't think it
right to go to a doctor for such things because that would cost
money and she'd probably have to tell her husband and it might get
out. So she's willing to risk her health by some such silly trick.
A fall might have caused her to abort and on the other hand it
might just have injured the child or broken her leg. Probably she
braced herself for the jump so she landed lightly."

     "Another woman said that she got nervous and so she took
something," Norma went on. "It just made her awfully sick and about
a week later she had a normal menstruation. She said she was
ashamed of herself and never told her husband."

     "Of course not. She wouldn't tell her husband, but she
probably was irritable and nervous and raised hell about something
else and he wondered what was the matter with her and why she
didn't seem to want anything to do with him sexually; and he
decided that she was tired of him. And it may be that at that
psychological moment he met an attractive woman who didn't seem to
have many scruples, and the next thing he knew he was having an
affair. That's the way those things usually go. Then the wife talks

                         
                  
                               68

                

about how she was dishonored and betrayed and men are only animals
after all. She say's that she's always been faithful and she's
suffered agonies of anxiety on his behalf and that is the way he
treats her. But she never let him know about her worrying."

     "I don't know," Norma mused thoughtfully. "You'd think that
two people who are married could talk anything over and reach an
understanding. But sometimes it seems to me that love causes
misunderstanding. At first the wife hates to do anything that would
spoil the romantic attitude of the honeymoon. Later she's afraid of
discussion that will cause her husband to be less ardent."

     She smiled at me. "We started with less disadvantages than
most couples, because we had talked over so much of this before
marriage and understood each other. But I can see how wives would
hate to bring up such things. You, being a doctor, ask me personal
questions that an ordinary husband probably wouldn't think about.
For instance, you check my periods, and if I'm delayed you do
something about it. But no average husband would think of that. And
if he comes home worried, the wife hates to add to his worries. If
the husband seems gay, she feels that she doesn't want to Spoil his
mood by dragging up a disagreeable subject. So she just lets it go,
waiting for the perfect opportunity. And the opportunity never
comes."

     "I know," I agreed. "And oddly enough, some women resent their
husbands asking them questions. I've had women say that their sex
life was marred because their husbands asked them how they felt and
how they enjoyed intercourse. The men were merely trying to make
Sure the wives were satisfied. They were unusually thoughtful and
knew that some women are slower than the man. But the wives got
self-conscious about it."

     I used to be constantly amazed at the many mental quirks women
have regarding sexual matters. But most of them are easily traced
to a desire to calm their consciences and to the idea that anything
that isn't found out is all right.

     For instance, a woman will excuse home attempts to abort
herself. Going to a doctor seems to definitely ally herself with
the wrong kind of woman and forces her to come out in the open and
admit that she doesn't want a child and is willing to enlist
assistance to get rid of the fetus.

     She will risk injury to herself by several such attempts, and
then go ahead and have the child if she fails, rather than go to a
doctor and do the thing scientifically and safely. Then she may
preen herself later because she didn't do anything, forgetting that
it was because of ignorance that she didn't succeed in aborting
herself.

     Likewise, many women feel that it is all right to have
abortions up to about two months, explaining that the fetus is
"nothing much but a germ." Of course, the danger increases as time
passes, but five days after conception there is life. What these
women really mean is that if they wait until they are far along
people will notice the change in their bodies and suspect something
if there is an abortion.

                         
                  
                               69

                

     Similarly, women, especially religious women, feel that
withdrawal on the part of the man or continence during dangerous
periods is all right, while use of artificial devices to prevent
contraception is sinful. Here again the fear of being found out
enters into it. Most women hate to purchase any type of
contraceptive. Likewise, they hate to ask other women for definite
advice.

     Some of them might be shocked out of this false modesty if
they knew the freedom with which men, both married and single,
discuss such matters. Men have far less hesitancy about going to a
doctor for an examination or information and they buy
contraceptives calmly at a drug store.

     One woman almost broke up her marriage because she refused to
go to the doctor. She had a physical defect which made intercourse
painful. Yet she delayed a visit to the doctor. Finally her husband
forced her to go. Even then she sulked about it. She even tried the
argument that her husband should be willing to abandon sex life.

     On the other hand, there was another young bride who was a
virgin before marriage. For several weeks she had intercourse every
night. Then came a night when her husband was tired and did not
make love to her. She seemed a trifle upset but he paid little
attention to that. He thought that she surely knew that there were
limits to the man's physical powers.

     The next day she hastened down to my office, greatly
disturbed. She had been filled with the usual mass of
misinformation that seems to be dished out to virgins by their
feminine relatives and friends and she thought that her sex life
was over just because she had missed one night I assured her that
her husband's love hadn't cooled, and that he hadn't suddenly
become impotent. She went home a wiser wife.

     I told Norma about it, but she didn't laugh.

     "That isn't so uncommon," she said. "And on the other hand,
there are girls who have been told that once a week is the limit
and they are afraid their husbands are over-sexed if they want
intercourse more often. This girl's case was no joke. A friend of
mine divorced her husband because she wanted intercourse every
night and he couldn't stand it."

     Such women are usually dismissed lightly as over-sexed, but in
many cases that isn't true. The man may be too hasty, and the woman
therefore does not get satisfaction. The partly-completed act on
her part leaves her restless, nervous and irritable and desiring
intercourse again as soon as possible, Some men cannot tell when
their wives have had an orgasm, and if the woman doesn't tell them
they may postpone the second act. Too, some types of contraceptive
devices prevent the normal culmination of the sex act.

     As I said, I tried to keep my home life separated from my
practice, although I discussed things freely, with Norma. After the
birth of our first child, of course, she was too busy at home to
want to work in my office. But from time to time she did bring 


                         
                  
                               70

                

cases to me. I objected, because I didn't want her placed in the
position of a go-between for an abortionist. She laughed when I
told her that.

     "Don't you remember how we first met?" she asked.

     The first case she called to my attention went smoothly. A
friend came to her and said that another woman, whom I shall call
Gladys, was pregnant and wanted to do something about it.

     Gladys was married, but she already had four children, and she
and her husband could not afford any more. She was not in good
health and she hated her present condition.

     She had told her friend, Anna, about it and Anna had gone to
her own doctor. The doctor refused to take the case. It was another
example of how a woman optimistically declares that her doctor will
perform an illegal operation and then is turned down. The doctor,
I gathered, had been a little indignant and had asked if Anna had
used his name in any way. Fortunately Anna had not -- or at least
she said she had not.

     The next time she tried a more round-about way, by approaching
Noma. Anna said that Gladys had tried the more common home methods,
without success. She was desperate, and was in a continual nervous
state. She had been warned at the birth of her last child that it
would be better for her to wait several years until she had another
one.

     "She's one of these helpless women who don't know how to
manage anything," Anna said with a shrug of her shoulders. "You
know the kind. She means well, but somehow she always manages to
muddle things. She didn't have sense enough to insist that her
husband be more careful, and now she's with child again."

     Norma saw Gladys and was upset at her weeping. So she, came to
me.

     "She'll keep on doing things until she gets herself in such a
condition that she'll either die in childbirth or she'll kill the
child beforehand," she told me. "She's in that hysterical state
where she's willing to try anything. And, you know, old women can
offer more methods of abortion than they can for curing colds.
She'll keep it a secret, and Anna has promised to see that you will
get your money."

     I told them to bring Gladys in. She was what I call the "faded
petunia" type of woman. She worked so hard fixing things for her
husband and her children and keeping her house clean that she never
had any time left for herself. Her skin was wrinkled and her hair
lacked luster. She was not the "good manager" type, and it showed
in her last year's clothes and her bedraggled hair and work-
roughened hands. Of course, her husband did not make much money.
But some women seem to be able to keep themselves up in spite of
being pinched for funds. She was the sort of woman who will make a
martyr of herself and then wonder dumbly why she isn't appreciated,
why her husband doesn't stay home and why her children, when they 
grow up, seem to lack respect for her but give her, instead, a sort
of pitying affection.
                         
                  
                               71

                

     I told her I would help her out. Her husband didn't object,
although he was the sort of man who didn't exactly approve of
abortions, just as he liked to pretend that he didn't use
contraceptives because he "disapproved" of such things. He was
willing, it seemed, as long as he did not have to do much about it.
There was nothing to do but give Gladys temporary help by aborting
her and then try to frighten her into being a little more firm with
her husband.

     "Isn't there a way that you could fix it so Gladys wouldn't
have any more children?" Anna asked.

     I looked my most professional. "She could, of course, have her
ovaries removed. But they are in good condition and I would refuse
to perform such an operation or to advise it."

     Anna hesitated a moment. "I've heard that operations can be
performed on men so that they can't become fathers but they still
have their normal sexual feelings."

     "Don't believe all you hear," I evaded. "I wouldn't attempt
such a thing. If that's what you mean. In the first place, you'd
never get the man to agree to it. In the second place, the woman
might regret it later. These people want some children. The
children they have might die, and then they couldn't have any more.
I'll give temporary help, but I won't perform sterilization
operations. And don't let anyone fool you with these theories about
hypodermic injections that will make the man sterile for a few
months. Most of the talk about magic and simple operations, is
quackery, along with sure-fire cheap abortions and positive
contraceptives."

     Anna, who had gone to school with her, brought me the money
beforehand. Gladys got along as well as could be expected. When she
was well, I sent for Anna.

     "I know you've impressed the need for secrecy on her," I said.
"But for some reason I'm upset about the woman. I can't help
feeling sorry for her. For the love of Mike, try to get her to
understand that unselfishness is not always a virtue. Too much
unselfishness makes other people uncomfortable. As long as she has
that air of hang-dog devotion, she'll be run over. She's made a
mild rebellion in having an abortion. See if you can keep up the
good work."

     I don't know what Anna told her. Probably she hinted that if
Gladys didn't pay more attention to herself, her husband would
start straying. There were plenty of examples she could point to.
Later I saw Gladys and she looked amazingly better. Her children
were no longer dressed in the most expensive coats and hats and the
daintiest of handmade frocks and I doubt if she still slaved hours
over a pet dish of her husband's. I remarked about it to Anna. Anna
looked vague and mysterious.

     "Her husband took his stenographer out to lunch and dinner
while she was "sick," she said. Then she grinned. "But he doesn't
do it now," she added.


                         
                  
                               72

                

     Which reminds me of a young bride who came to me for
information about birth control.

     "I thought I heard you say once that you wanted children," I
said. "You came in here before marriage for a physical examination
and said you wanted to be sure that you could bear healthy children
without much pain. What's made you change your mind?"

     "Just before I was married, I saw something that gave me a
decided shock," she replied. "One of my best friends has only been
married about a year and she's pregnant. She's the sort who takes
it hard. She had a lovely figure, and she hates to go around now
that she's big and clumsy. Besides, she's ill, nausea in the
morning, headaches, general listlessness and all that. Betty was
the sort who was always the life of the party, and she won't go
anywhere feeling bad. So she stays at home."

     "Yes," I told her, "but the chances are you'd got by pretty
easy if you took care of yourself"

     "Oh, I'm going to have children. But in my own good time. I
hadn't finished my story. Betty's husband, Jim, married her because
they had so much fun together. He likes to dance and get around.
They decided after marriage that it would be more fun to just
forget precautions and let nature take its course. Jim fancied that
it would be fan to have a toddler around the house. And they said
they wanted to be young enough that they could grow up with the
children."

     "Yes," I responded, "I've heard that. It has its points. But
one of the disadvantages is that children need a civilized adult
for a parent and not a happy-go-lucky playmate."

     "Well," she said, "I saw Jim lunching  with an attractive girl
the other day, and then I saw him dining with another girl. I know
it's no fun for him to go home and find Betty moaning on the couch
or to learn that she's at her mother's and have her mother looking
reproachfully at him for what he's done to her darling girl. But at
the same time, Jim is doing considerable partying and in the
company of a good-looking divorcee who always had her eye on him.
I don't know how far the affair has gone, and I didn't tell Betty,
because I'm not the sort of girl who rushes to her friends and says
'I think you ought to know.' Betty isn't in any condition to have
to face too many facts."

     "Anyhow," I suggested, "her husband probably will repent
sooner or later and rush back to her."

     "Maybe. But I'll admit I didn't like to see this on the eve of
my own marriage. For Jim and Betty were one of the good examples
that caused me to take the leap. But I'm no babe-in-the-woods. I
realize that it's fairly common for a man to do some playing around
while his wife is pregnant. I know that a lot of men feel that it's
unfair for them to be denied sex life for three or four months.
Personally I feel that's a selfish viewpoint. But I believe in
facing facts. I thought it over and decided that my husband was a
normal male, and that, being so, the wedding ceremony was no 
insurance that he really was going to cherish me forever and be
blind to all other women."
                         
                  
                               73

                

     "Yes," I agreed. I like to encourage these girls to talk to me
because I may be able to pass some of their good advice on later.

     "So I decided that since I loved the man and had gone this far
with the engagement, there was no point in being a coward. But
there was no point either in making things too hard for myself.
What I want is to have as much fun with my husband as I can for a
year or two. We can't keep the rose-colored spectacles on forever.
But I want to have a little care-free youth together first."

     "And," I said, "You want your husband to get into the habit of
thinking of you as his permanent partner in fun so that you'll be
more certain if he does stray a little he'll come back to you."

     "Certainly," she agreed. "And I don't believe that six or
seven. months is enough time for that. I want our marriage to be
well established before I take on any risks. If after two years of
married companionship I get pregnant, I can more easily condone any
lack of attention from my husband. I'll remember that we've had a
lot of fun and maybe a slight marital vacation wouldn't hurt either
of us. Furthermore, Bill would be used to regarding himself as a
married man. He'd have got in the habit of making small adjustments
and sacrifices for our mutual welfare. And people would be
accustomed to regarding him as a married man, which is important.

     "I don't want to wait too long. For if I do, I may wait until
our marriage is beginning to pall a little on Bill and my pregnancy
would be the one thing needed to cause him to seek diversion
elsewhere. It's all very well," and she grinned at me, "to talk
about baby hands bringing people together and husbands rushing back
to their wives when they find them sewing tiny garments. But while
the husband may be pleased, he may also be annoyed. And he isn't
going to enjoy having a wife who is just a human incubator for
several months."

     "Well," I told her, "I'm thankful that you're thinking of this
before and not after you're pregnant. I don't think you'll have any
trouble with Bill. Just remember that it's important not to go to
thinking you're too smart and let the iron hand come out of the
velvet glove. Don't ever let your husband know that you're managing
him. You can be too modern in this sex game.

     And you can. Which brings me back to my wife again. I came
home one knight to find her laughing.

     "I think I've got other case for you," she announced. "I
demand, of course, that you split your fee."

     "Split fees are unethical," I said sternly, and then kissed
her, "Who's been bothering you now?"

     "It's really funny and yet it isn't.  Kitty was over here
today."






                         
                  
                               74

                

     I knew Kitty and I grimaced. The last time I saw her she was
playing her usual good Samaritan role. She married a wealthy man
and the marriage turned a little sour. So she finds her pleasure in
doing as much good as she can with her social prestige and her
money. I like Kitty, but she usually finds good works for her
friends to do.

     "She hasn't found another old woman trying to trick a young
man into marriage, has she?" I asked.

     Kitty had once brought me a middle-aged widow who urgently
wanted to marry. She'd started an affair with a young man, taking
him as her protege. The man was a young artist; and she bought some
pictures from him and also got some of her friends to help.

     Then she'd used her help to get the man to become her lover.
it was a disagreeable story. The woman appeared very pleasant and
cultured, but she really was an unscrupulous hell-cat. The artist
was a handsome young idiot, and, like many creative workers, he had
little common sense about finances or about his social life. It was
simply that most of his intelligence went into his work. He drifted
into the affair, and the woman persuaded him that she was using
contraceptives. Then she told him that she was pregnant and they
must marry. I gathered that she had used other wiles without
success. Part of the time the boy simply did not know what she was
getting at. He really thought she was interested in his work and in
himself only as an artist. He became her lover because he thought
that would make her happier. He never dreamed of marriage until she
came out flat-footed with the demand.

     He went to Kitty in horror. She felt responsible, for she'd
bought some pictures from him and had introduced him to the other
woman. Kitty came to me.

     "The old hag has her hooks on him and she won't let him go,"
she said with brutal frankness. "And he's still got enough ideals
and chivalry to think that he must marry her if she wants him to.
He knows that it's her fault, but he feels that if she loved him
enough to do a thing like this he ought to marry her and give her
what happiness he can. Then he feels indebted to her.

     "Understand," she went on. "He isn't the gigolo type. He
really has talent, if not genius, but he had a lot of hard luck.
And this old dame looked like a god-send to him. She's clever and
she arranged it so that he wasn't suspicious of what she wanted
until too late. I should have guessed what she was up to, but I
didn't think that he was so dumb, and I thought she merely wanted
an affair."

     "Well," I asked, "why doesn't he marry her, and play her own
game. He can wait until after the child is born and then sue her
for divorce."

     "You don't get it," she responded. "I told you he wasn't the
gigolo type. Probably she'd soon tire of him, but I don't know.
She's the sort who would feed on youth. But even if she'd let him
get a divorce soon, she'd absolutely ruin him first. Alone, he 
might get to be a great artist, but he won't if he marries her."

                         
                  
                               75

                

     I talked to the boy, and I saw some of his work. He hadn't
fallen yet for his patroness talk about an easy road to fame and
fortune. He was bewildered at her failure to understand that he had
to have rest and solitude to do any work. He was already in a bad
physical condition from too much drink, late hours, rich food and
hectic gaiety.

     "You see," Kitty told me, "the boy's not spoiled yet. But it
isn't good for young artists to have too much money. He's got to
work hard. What he needs, if he marries, is a woman who will
sacrifice herself to his art, see that he eats, sleeps and has
plenty of time to work. Mrs. D will ruin him forever in a year. And
he's good. I know about such things."

     He did have a picture of a young alums madonna that haunted
me. But Mrs. D wanted him to paint pretty women, society ladies. He
didn't want to. He said there was no truth, no art, in that.

     So I agreed to help Kitty. She brought Mrs. D to me, and I
examined her. She was pregnant, all right. Then I told her vaguely
that she was going to have a bad time. I gave her some medicine
which increased rather than helped her nausea. Kitty laid it on
pretty thick about how she'd lose her figure -- she was one of
those women who dieted and massaged in order to keep slim. And she
was afraid of pain. Her idea seemed to be that with enough
specialists she could somehow slide through, but I really believe
she had never intended to go through with childbirth. She probably
meant to have an abortion as soon as the marriage was performed.

     But she had an abortion first. I performed it. She wanted it
kept secret and this fitted in fine with Kitty's plans. The
engagement hadn't been announced, and I pretended ignorance of the
whole business. I was simply a doctor who had been called in. As
soon as the abortion was completed, Kitty got the boy away. Mrs. D
suspected some underhanded work, but she had no comeback. She'd
asked for the abortion, and she got it. She certainly wasn't going
to picture herself as a jilted woman. And when the young idealist
learned that his fiancee had had an abortion rather than lose her
figure, he forgot everything she'd said about the sacredness of
their perfect love and its culmination in the birth of their child.

     Naturally, however, I was wary of any more of Kitty's plans
for saving humanity. My role is not persuading women to have
abortions.

     "What did Kitty want this time?" I inquired bluntly.

"It's a little complicated," Norma explained.

"All Kitty's stories are complicated. And I don't like your being
mixed up in them. You can get burned putting out a fire as well as
playing with one. But go ahead."

     Kitty, it seemed, had a friend, a small town girl who had run
away from home, come to the city and drifted in with a Bohemian
set. Like most girls of this type, she went to extremes, or wanted
to. She got a good job and she had a couple of love affairs broken 


                         
                  
                               76

                

off before they really got started. That gave her a sort of phobia.
She felt that she must have a really modern liaison. She talked the
usual hooey about liberating herself and being utterly free.

     Her set did a lot of preaching about free love and the
advantages of illegitimate children. Most of them practiced free
love all right, but they confined their love children to writing
pamphlets about them and long discussions in cigarette-smoke filled
garrets and tea rooms.

     Then the girl, Clara, met a middle-aged man who was married
and had three children. He was satisfied with his marriage, but he
was still handsome and since he worked in town and his home was in
the country, he took advantage of "business conferences" to have a
series of love affairs.

     Blair usually pictured his wife as a dull housewife whose sole
thoughts were about the children. He was whimsical about his own
"dreary" existence, and he kept a flat in town where he entertained
his lady-loves in the best romantic fashion.

     He met Clara, and in an exceedingly short time took her for
his mistress. She was filled with ideas about the beauty of free
love and she thought it romantic to have an affair with an older
and a married man. Blair, on the other hand, had just been given
his dismissal by a married woman who preferred not to risk losing
her husband, and it soothed his vanity to immediately take a young
and good looking girl.

     Kitty said that he was a romantic lover, having his meetings
in a flat decked out like an Oriental harem and going in for
poetical thoughts and tenderness. Clara immediately fell deeply in
love with him, so much so that he began to get worried, for she
wanted to go away on week ends with him and finally asked him to
desert his wife. This didn't suit him. Like most men of that age
and type, be, wanted adventure, but wanted it adjusted to a
comfortable routine, one that did not interfere with his business
or his family.

     Clara suspected that he was tiring of her a little, and she
conceived the idea of having a child by him: Then, she thought, he
would remain her lover forever, she could move into his flat or
perhaps have a little place in the country. The latter idea seemed
more romantic; he could go out there for week ends and nights and
they could be closer than ever. It would keep him from having to go
to parties, which, he said, bored him, and save him from too much
time with his wife. Eventually she thought they might be married,
but that was not important.

     She didn't tell Blair this until she actually got with child.
As soon as she had missed her period she informed him of it and
waited for his gratitude for what she had done. It didn't come,
Blair was tiring of her and of her demands. It had been fun to
initiate this girl into sex life and watch her respond and her
passion grow. But she was becoming too demanding, and he was no
longer as young as he used to be. He was about ready to break it
off.


                         
                  
                               77

                

     He was horrified when she told him. He urged her to do
something immediately, and offered to make all the arrangements or
to give her the money. She refused, and he then jumped at something
she'd said and broke up the affair.

     Since then, she'd tried to see him but failed. And she
couldn't decide what to do.

     "Tell Kitty to let her make up her mind," I growled irritably.
"You know, Norma, that I lean over backward in this business rather
than have any insinuations that I try to build up my practice by
urging abortions or even consenting to do them without A very good
reason."

     "Anyhow," I added. "the girl sounds like a fool."

     "She isn't a fool. She's just got some silly radical notions.
Kitty said that Blair is an utter cad, and he will deny all blame.
And Blair's wife is a fine woman. She knows about Blair, but she
takes it rather than break up the home and ruin her children's
lives. Clara just needs a little time to settle down."

     "I'll talk to Kitty," I promised.

     Kitty had about persuaded Clara that giving birth to a free-
love child was not the noble thing she'd thought it would be. She'd
lose her job and it would be hard to find another one when she was
burdened with the child. She was thoroughly disillusioned now about
Blair, and there was no point in having a child as a souvenir of
the affair.

     "Clara had a pretty hard time when she first came to town and
I hate to see her make a fool of herself," Kitty told me. "But I'm
really thinking more about Blair' wife. If Clara has this child,
it's going to be pretty hard to keep Dorothy from finding out about
it. Clara had some haywire ideas about going to Dorothy and asking
her to give up Blair. But Blair knocked that out of her head."

     "I can't see it, Kitty,", I said. "It's too risky. I'm not
going to be put into a position of persuading this girl to abet me
in a crime. If she's the fool she sounds, she'll spread it all over
town as evidence of her emancipation."

     "You trusted my judgment once before," Kitty reminded me. "I
think this will teach Clara a lesson. But to be frank, I'm afraid
that she'll later go to Blair's wife and demand help in taking care
of the child. Dorothy has had enough punishment. I'm willing to pay
the fee to spare her constant humiliation, either directly or
indirectly, from Clara."

     I hesitated. "You talk to the girl again," I urged.

     She did, and Clara agreed to the abortion. I was nervous about
it. I figured it was a case in which we were meddling too much. And
I was right.




                         
                  
                               78

                

     But I never suspected what would happen. Clara went through
the abortion all right, although she had orgies of self-pity. She 
did have some intelligence, but she was so filled with silly ideas
and so self-centered that she was doomed for trouble. I've seen
many people like that. They are so absorbed in themselves that they
utterly disregard other people until too late.

     To please Kitty, I was pleasant to her. And I stressed that
this was a favor I was doing her and was not my usual practice.
That was, of course, just a line that I used on most patients to
keep them from spreading the news indiscriminately that I was an
abortionist.

     But Clara took the whole affair the wrong way. She'd been
badly upset by her affair with Blair, and sympathy went to her
bead. So she fell for me on the rebound.

     It was the first time this had happened to me, to my
knowledge, at least. A great many of my patients became my friends.
But the very nature of the work kept sentiment out of it.

     Clara, however, was so filled with the idea that she must be
ultra-modern that she felt it dramatic for there to be some
physical-bond between us. She exaggerated everything I said to her.
She kept coming back to my office when there was no need. She
twisted what I said to mean that I considered myself her guardian.
She invited me to lunches, to dinners. She would call for me to
come to her apartment.

     I was irritated, but I didn't take it seriously. I knew other
doctors who had to be diplomatic about calls that were obviously
subterfuges. I kept myself impersonal and was as polite. to her as
I could be.

     Then she went to Norma and made a scene. She told my wife that
the needed my perfect understanding and sympathy; that Norma had
had several years of marriage with me, had a child by me and should
share me with her. She was positive that it was only Norma's mid-
Victorian scruples and selfishness that kept me from having an
affair. And she wanted Norma to consent to it. She said that she
had made a mistake before in not going to the wife, but she wanted
this to be open and aboveboard.

     Norma kept her head and, thank God, had sense enough not to
lose her temper or to take it too seriously. But she was upset
about it and told me.

     "I'm telling you this, darling, because I trust you," she said
to me when I came home. "I know that you're not having an affair
with Clara because you have more sense. I'm egotistical enough,
too, to think you have better taste. But I don't want Clara
broadcasting that I'm interfering with your life."

     She grinned at me. "Darling, if you ever do have an affair,
for God's sake pick out a woman who is so charming and so beautiful
that I can see she's superior to me and you couldn't possibly
resist her. Otherwise, it will ruin my self-respect.


                         
                  
                               79

                

     I was furious. I called Kitty and told her the whole Story.

     "Quit pampering that fool," I demanded, "and shut her up
somehow. Make her understand that I don't want to see her. I'll go
with you to do it. She's had too much done for her. I thought this
was a mistake."

     And for once I didn't use any tact. I took Kitty along, for I
didn't want Clara to have any excuse to misinterpret that visit.
And I told Clara frankly why I had helped her and what I thought of
her. She started to act, but Kitty put an end to that by telling
her not to be a fool; that she'd done enough emoting off the stage
to last the rest of her life.

     I never saw Clara again. Kitty was deeply apologetic. I heard
afterward that Clara went out to the country, got good and sick of
the rural peace she'd wanted, came back to town and got a job. She
kept her mouth shut about the affair. and that was all I wanted.

                    XI. DANGER SIGNALS AHEAD

     At first I had been constantly amazed at my lack of trouble.
I had feared in my first case that the sheriff would come in any
moment.

     Gradually I began to take it all as a matter of course and to
think myself a pretty clever fellow. I grew more prosperous. Norma
and I moved into a nice little house in the better part of town. We
felt that we could afford children.

     I took as many precautions as I could in my business. My
apparent immunity was also due to the fact that any girl who goes
to a doctor instead of a quack or a midwife in such cases usually
is intelligent enough to keep her mouth shut.

     Then I had a whole series of lucky breaks. Not in my actual
work. I was constantly improving my technique and I never lost a
patient. But in other ways I was lucky.

     My home life continued serene. Norma and I started out with
few illusions, and we followed the French idea of a marriage for
happiness rather than pleasure. I was teased a great deal when we
had our first child.

     "So you don't let your practice interfere with your home
work," a colleague told me.

     Once a woman asked Norma if she wasn't jealous of my many
women patients. She had come to me professionally and noticed that
there were several unusually pretty girls in the waiting room each
time.

     "Most women who come to see my husband are not feeling
flirtatious," Norma said calmly.





                         
                  
                               80

                

     Not long after that, she did have a disagreeable experience.
An acquaintance of ours came to me for an abortion. She was a 
married woman, she could afford the child and I saw no reason why
she should have the abortion, especially as she was very anxious to
keep it a secret from her husband. I declined to have anything to
do With it. The woman was healthy, and I told her that she
exaggerated her fears of childbirth and that if her husband had any
objections he'd forget them after the birth of the child.

     I had a feeling that Mrs. C was lying to me. It usually is
easy for a doctor to tell when a woman is keeping something back.
Sooner or later, the patient makes a slip. The "friend" for whom
they are making these embarrassing inquiries becomes a pronoun in
the first person.

     Mrs. C made her slip when she said that she and her husband
were not getting along well.

     I remembered the case when a woman was planning to divorce her
husband and became with child by him.

     "Do you intend to divorce him?" I asked.

     "Oh, heavens, no," she said hastily.

     Her husband had a good deal of money and I thought that any
temporary fuss probably would be settled soon. Anyhow, I refused to
take the case.

     Then she went to my wife and threw a hysterical scene, begging
Norma to interfere and get me to perform the abortion. As a final
argument, she told Norma that I was the father of the child. Norma
merely laughed.

     "I said it was your business," she told me afterward, "and
that if It were your child you'd undoubtedly perform the abortion
or divorce me and marry her. That frightened her. I regret to say,
darling, that she didn't seem to desire your private attention's --
only your professional services."

     I heard the whole story afterward. Mrs. C and her husband were
not getting along well, and Mrs. C had taken a lover. Since
marriage, she had let her husband take care of contraceptives and
she expected her lover to do the same. He was careful in the early
stages of their affair. Then the mutual ardor cooled. Mrs. C was
afraid her husband would hear of the romance, and the man soon
tired of her. I can't believe that he was deliberately responsible,
but, anyhow, she was caught.

     Mrs. C and her husband had not lived together as man and wife
for several months. They were amiable enough, and Mrs. C hoped for
a reconciliation. Like a great many philandering wives, she was
much more cowardly about paying for her fun than the unmarried
woman. She wanted to have her cake and eat it, too.





                         
                  
                               81

                

     She finally went to a quack, he bungled the job, and she
almost died. Probably it was the best solution she could have 
arranged, for her husband was so anxious about her health that he
took the blame for everything and there was no divorce. I think she
may have told him that she tried to commit suicide and that caused
a miscarriage. Faking or threatening suicide to force a
reconciliation with a husband is a fairly common trick of the
neurotic.

     It may sound as if I were quibbling in this case when I had
performed abortions on married women. But Mrs. C was a thoroughly
selfish person, and there was no question of wrecking a subsequent
marriage as in Janet's triangle. C had not been unfaithful. Mrs. C
had merely tired of him and sought thrills elsewhere.

     I draw a distinction between a married woman who has affairs
with single men and a single girl who has affairs with married men.
The married woman usually allows her husband to support her while
she's being unfaithful. She takes his money to make herself
attractive to her lover, and frequently uses his home for her
assignations. She usually has her affair with some man who shirks
the responsibility of matrimony. She is secretly taking away from
her husband what she has publicly promised him. Sometimes she is
endangering the future of her children.

     The bachelor girl who has an affair with a married man may be
almost forced into it for social reasons. Most such girls hold jobs
which are not good enough to give them much money and prestige.
They usually come from families having little social standing. They
are unable to get single men who attract them. They come in contact
with intelligent, attractive and married businessmen. They know
better than to have such affairs but when the alternative is to sit
alone in a tiny apartment or bedroom or go to the movies with a
girl friend. I don't blame them overmuch for succumbing to the
overtures of the man and their own natural desire. Women cannot get
physical relief from prostitutes. Frequently the single men they
meet treat them with less respect and consideration than the
married men. So they drift into liaisons with an attractive and
moneyed husband.

     Fortunately, Norma did not believe Mrs. C's wild accusations,
but it did start a time of trouble for both of us. I am not
superstitious, but I do believe that every person gets a few good
breaks that are due as much to chance as to hard work, and I think
we all get some bad breaks we don't deserve.

     Immediately after Mrs. C's outburst, I began getting mine!

     Police found the body of a once-beautiful young blonde girl in
the river. She had apparently died as the result of an illegal
operation. Detectives took her photograph to all the doctors to see
if we could identify her. She had not come to me and I said so, but
the police asked me to go to the morgue and look at her.

     Eventually she was identified as an out-of-town school
teacher. Her mother saw her picture in an old newspaper and claimed
the body. If the detail's of the crime were discovered, they were 


                         
                  
                               82

                

never published. But there was a howl about quack doctors preying
on young girls, editorials in the newspapers and one minister
preached a sermon on abortionists.

     It was comparatively easy to guess what had happened. The girl
had gone to a quack and had died as the result of his ignorance and
carelessness. Then either her lover or the quack had become
frightened at the responsibility and had dumped her body into the
river. I don't believe she was physically able to kill herself. Nor
could she have destroyed all the clues to her identity and effaced
her trail so skillfully alone.

     I didn't like detectives snooping around, and I got the wind
up. My legitimate practice was growing and I couldn't afford to
jeopardize it as much as when almost all my livelihood came from
illegal work.

     It was while the investigation into the girl's death was still
going on that the head of a vice combination came to me with a
proposition.

     He beat around the bush for quite a while, but the general
gist of his offer was that I should devote all my time to his
combination which included a variety of rackets.

     I was amazed at the information he had about me. He knew the
exact state of my finances, that I was paying for a new house, that
I had a wife and a child and was expecting another. He also knew
that I had performed many abortions. He made me a flattering offer
as far as money was concerned. But I declined it.

     Although he'd been purposefully, vague, I knew what my duties
would be. I'd treat diseased prostitutes, perform abortions,
extract bullets and probably have to do a little facial surgery.

     A year or so before I'd pulled a few wires attempting to get
a job as city inspector of houses in my town. He knew that. He
pointed out that this would be about the same thing, only on the
wrong side of the law. I am in favor of strict supervision of
houses and I'm in favor of preventing childbirth among women who
are still in the profession. But I did not intend to become a
gangster physician. Such doctors have a way of disappearing
mysteriously.

     "Better think this over again," the vice lord told me. "That's
a lot of money, and people who go against us have a way of being
sorry."

     "You mean you'll take me for a ride?" I asked. "Don't be
foolish. I'm certainly not going to go to the police and report
your visit. For you to kill me would be a pointless murder and
dangerous. I could leave a message to be opened in case of my
death. You don't wait a doctor who is against your organization and
would betray you if promised protection from the police. And if you
mean to rake up a scandal about me, try to do it! You may have some
vague rumors but no proof and you're not likely to go to the police
or the medical association just to satisfy a small grudge."


                         
                  
                               83

                

     He grinned at this, said that he was only bluffing, but that
I was a smart man and if I ever changed my mind to insert a
personal advertisement in a newspaper in another city and leave it
in for a week.

     "No hard feelings," he said, and sauntered out.

     But he left me with some hard feelings. I smelled danger. I
didn't like to be in a position where detectives called on me when
bodies were found. Of course, their excuse was that the girl might
have come to me for an examination or to ask me to perform the
operation. I didn't like to be in a position where gangsters felt
that they could approach me. I couldn't express too much righteous
indignation. To the criminal mind, I was outside the law and the
gangster was outside the law and why didn't we get together? My
fine shading of gray between the black of crime and the white of
law would be lost on my caller,

     There was a chance that he had proof from some patient of mine
and could make me serious trouble. I resolved to temper my sail's
to the wind and turn down all such cases for a time.

     And the very next day, I had a chance to try my new
resolution. A man and woman came into my office. They were not
recommended, that is, no other doctor had sent them to me,
notifying me by telephone beforehand and sending a letter of
introduction with the patient. Those were the cases I liked best
because another doctor shared the responsibility and the patients
were hand-picked. Such persons were responsible citizens who went
about an illegal business as discreetly and efficiently as
possible.

     the situation. He was married, he said, and the man explained
while he and his wife did not live together, she would not divorce
him and he had no cause for divorce against her. She was willing to
live with him, and had never been unfaithful. He meant to keep away
from her until eventually she decided it would be simpler to
divorce him.

     In the meantime, he had met this girl and they had drifted
into an affair. He meant to marry her if he ever got the divorce.
But now she was with child and he was willing to pay for an
abortion for her.

     I didn't like either the man or the woman. And when all is
said about questions and promises, I must trust a great deal to
personal judgment of patients. The average doctor may not like his
patients, but it really isn't going to hurt him if they blab all
over town that his medicine did them no good.

     The girl sat in sullen silence. She was unattractive, thick-
browed, with small gray eyes, too big a mouth and thick, bushy
hair. She had a chunky, peasant's figure. She stared at the floor,
her lower lip protruding. The man was glib and talkative; a little
too talkative. He was nervous, and said too much about how be was
"Willing" to pay for the abortion.



                         
                  
                               84

                

     He was rather flashily dressed, and wore a big diamond ring on
his little finger. I stared at that ring and wondered if this were
a frame-up job designed to force me into the vice combination. But
I doubted that. The girl looked too dumb and inexperienced to be
associated with a vice syndicate.

     The girl didn't seem to be taking any interest in the
conversation, and I didn't like that. Unless she were anxious to
have an abortion, she might be a trouble-maker. Nothing was said
about whether she was a virgin when she met this man. That's
usually important. A girl who's had several lovers regarded
pregnancy as one of the risks of the game, and isn't so likely to,
try to force marriage. She's probably had to worry about an
abortion before, and she takes it more or less for granted. Her
feeling usually is that she's been lucky to escape one so far, and
it's up to her to stick her chin out and take her punishment.

     If the man was so anxious to brag about how he was "willing"
to foot the bills, he'd probably be the sort to quibble over the
price. Besides, as I said, I had the wind up. So I told them curtly
that there was nothing doing. I offered to examine the girl to make
sure that she was pregnant but I told them they had been
misinformed if they thought I took such cases.

     The man was nervously apologetic, and I went on stressing the
enormity of the act he was asking of me.

     "Do you know of any other doctors who would do it?" he asked.
"I'd pay anything."

     I shook my head. "No registered doctor would do it," I said.
"You might find a man whose license has been taken away from him
but who still does some hole-in-the-wall practice. However, I don't
know of any."

     They went away, then, the girl still sullen, the man trying to
placate her. I felt sorry for him. It didn't look to me as if that
girl had been seduced. I couldn't imagine her believing anything
but an affidavit. I could see that he was afraid of her.

     He had good reason to be frightened. Two days later the news
papers were full of the story. She had shot and killed him. She
surrendered meekly to the police and told her story. She worked at
a cheap lodging house where the man stayed. She claimed that he
promised to marry her, but I've always doubted that she was seduced
in the literal meaning of the word. Also, I didn't believe her
statement that she was a virgin when she met him.

     At any rate, when she became with child she demanded immediate
marriage. Then, she said, he told her that he was already married.
Police discovered that his story of his separation was false. His
wife had divorced him several years before. However, I can't blame
him for trying to evade marriage with the sullen, black-browed
girl.





                         
                  
                               85

                

     The girl did not want an abortion, She was the animal type,
insensitive to everything except pain and passion. She was afraid 
of an abortion and she wanted to hang on to her man and had sense
enough to see that if she got rid of the child she'd probably lose
him. So she proposed that they go away and live as man and wife and
have the child. He refused, saying that it would cost him his job.
She found him packing his clothes, and killed him.

     I heaved a sigh of relief that I'd followed my intuition. The
man already was tired of the affair, and he would have fled as soon
as be arranged an abortion. The girl would have raised hell and
either followed him or gone to the police. Then the story would
have come out and I would have been implicated in a much more
dangerous fashion.

     As it was, the police came to me and I had a straight story
for them. I simply said that the man brought the girl to me, wanted
an abortion and I refused to take the case. My Story tallied with
that of the girl.

     "He promised to marry me and then he wouldn't do that," the
girl told the police. "Then he said it would be easy to fix me up,
and the first doctor we went to said that he wouldn't do it for
anything, that no good doctor would and that it would be dangerous
to go to a bad doctor."

     So unwittingly my warning against abortions had sent a man to
his death. Everything I had said about quacks was true of course,
but it had been the one touch needed to set aflame the shouldering
wrath of the girl. I had made her lover a liar on all counts.

     I can't say that I felt sorry. The man was no loss to
humanity. He would have left me holding the bag if I had done what
he wished. And I would have been in a damned awkward position if
the girl had killed him after I'd performed an abortion and perhaps
had shot herself, too.

     All the same, it gave me a bad scare. The defense brought me
into court. It didn't do me any good to appear as a witness for the
defense in a sordid sex murder and have it broadcast that the
murdered man brought his mistress to me for an illegal operation.

     I talked it over with Norma after the trial closed, with the
woman receiving a light sentence. Her counsel had pleaded emotional
insanity.

     "Maybe it would be better for me to stick to straight practice
now," I argued. "After all, a lot of young doctor's do this stuff
just to get started. I've paid my debt to my father and we've got
a little money ahead."

     "I don't know," she said slowly. "Remember how we met?"

     Of course, I did. She had come in with a friend who wanted an
abortion.




                         
                  
                               86

                

     "You seemed to us an angel in disguise. Pearl had expected
some rather nasty man who'd treat her as if she were a prostitute.
You were so gentle and considerate that you made the whole thing a
lot easier."

     "So," I grinned, "that's why you fell in love with me."

     She took it seriously. "Partly," she admitted. "I could see
that it wasn't entirely for money that you were breaking the law.
You actually wanted to help people in trouble. And you did it with
gentleness and consideration and courtesy -- all admirable
qualities in a husband. It looked to me as if you had tolerance and
a breadth of vision."

     She looked at me. "I'm feminine enough to hope that other
women who come to your office won't think so much of the same
things. But at the same time it doesn't seem to me that because
none of my friends happen to be in trouble now, I should urge you
to quit that part of your practice and force girls to go to other
doctors who are in need of money and aren't good enough to get a
legitimate practice."

     "I was quitting chiefly for you," I said. "I didn't want you
to have to tell the children that their papa is in prison."

     "You haven't been in any serious trouble yet," she reminded
me.

     I knew that, but I still had the feeling that trouble was in
the air. I'm not superstitious, and there had been three times I
had skated on thin ice, the girl in the river, Mrs. C's hysterical
visit, and the trial. I have heard people say that suicides go by
threes, explaining that there usually are several persons thinking
about suicide. The publicity given the first one to take the leap
serves as an impetus for the others.

     However, I began taking abortion cases again. A prominent
businessman brought his daughter to me. His story was one that was
all-too-familiar to me, although I heard it from the girl more
frequently than from the parent.

     The girl was a high-school student, who had got mixed up with
a set of sensation-hunters. They were all sons and daughters of
well-to-do families and had liberal allowances. There were two or
three leaders who, had they come from less wealthy families, would
have been the moving spirits of juvenile gangs. Some of them were
children of divorce, given cars and too much spending money in lieu
of parents.

     They started going to dances too soon, drinking too much,
driving too fast for a thrill. Then they took up marijuana. It was
considered a great joke to give a girl a marijuana cigarette
instead of the regular variety.

     Jane Alice had received bids to all the Christmas dances given
by high-school fraternities and sororities. I have always felt that
these high-school organizations are a mistake. Their members 


                         
                  
                               87

                

attempt to imitate the college Greek-letter 'Societies' but do not
have strict supervision by national authorities, nor are the
members old enough to know how to take care of themselves.

     The Christmas dances in my city were marked by a lot of
drinking, usually bad liquor, since the Christmas expenses put such
a drain on the purse of a high-school boy that good liquor could
not be included. A lot of the girls drank because they were afraid
if they were not "good sports" their escorts simply would not call
to get them or they would be wallflowers at the dance. This "good
sport" fallacy causes more trouble than any one other thing in
modern youth. The idea that popularity must be had at all costs is
another road to heartbreak.

     "Her mother and I knew there were chaperons at the dance's,"
Mr. B told me. "And we were slightly acquainted with most of the
other youngsters who went. We knew that Jane Alice came home pretty
late, but then the dances lasted until 2 o'clock. Most of the kids
usually went somewhere for coffee and sandwiches after the dance..
We didn't want to keep Jane Alice from being popular by making her
punch a time-clock."

     Jane Alice was one of those "average" girls who must work hard
for popularity. So she had weakly submitted to a high-school boy,
drunk and amorous. He had given her a brief rush and she felt that
she must pay with her body.

     Fortunately for the girl, she was a weakling and accustomed to
going to her mother with all her complaints, her need for a new
dress, her desire for a party, for a new permanent, for an increase
in her allowance. She didn't have the courage or self-reliance to
keep her secret. The boy had dropped her after he found her "easy."
so she went to her mother and told the whole story.

     The mother was shocked, but luckily she had sense enough to
keep the matter quiet and consult with her husband. They decided
that Jane Alice was far too young to marry, even if the boy were
willing, which was doubtful. Besides, Jane Alice now had a nervous,
hysterical hatred of the youth. There is a superstition that a girl
always has a special tenderness for her first lover. But this is
not always true. Jane Alice now regarded the experience as virtual
rape.

     The affair had seared her back into a desire for normal
girlhood. She had a glimpse of what it meant to be a woman, and she
was thoroughly frightened and disgusted. She hadn't got any
pleasure out of her sexual experience. And the boy, who had
appeared glamorous when she was tight, now seemed only a pimply-
faced, callow high-school youth.

     I have seen the same thing happen after a hasty elopement. The
girl, who was all for being an adult, wants to hurry back to the
warm protection of her family and her care-free adolescence.

     So the B's decided not to tell the youth or his parents.




                         
                  
                               88

                

     "He isn't old enough to be married," Mr. B said, "and even if
Jane Alice did act the fool, he isn't good enough for her. His
parents might stir up trouble by believing the boy if he denied the
charge. We figured that the less said about the whole thing the
better."

     I agreed. There was no point in letting the boy know the
results of his carelessness. It might have frightened him into
being more careful thereafter, and then again it might have made
him think that he needn't take any precaution's because if the girl
were caught her parents would take care of everything. Too, he
might have started boasting about what a man he was and how he had
knocked up the daughter of one of the town's leading citizens. The
much-vaunted chivalry of man usually comes only when he has
acquired enough sense to see the value of silence -- not only to
protect the girl but for his own benefit.

     The abortion was a success. Afterward Jane Alice wanted to go
away to a girl's school, but I advised against it.

     "You're asking me and I'm telling you," I said frankly to Mr.
B "Jane Alice is just a kid, but she's woman enough to get herself
into a mess of this type, and so she ought to be adult enough to
face some of the less disagreeable of the consequences."

     "I know," he agreed. "That's what I told my wife. Sooner or
later Jane Alice must learn to take things on the chin. She's got
to learn that she can't run away from everything. She may not spend
her life in this town, but on the other hand she may live here for
several years. The only way she can get over the idea that she
can't face her friends is to force herself to do it. She wanted to
resign from her sorority, but I told her that would cause talk. I
think that she'll be able to avoid any wild parties and that she's
learned her lesson. I've promised her that if she finishes this
year here, she can go away to a girls' boarding-school."

     I nodded. "But there's still another reason. I don't agree
with people who say that all boarding-schools are hotbeds of
perversion. But I do think that it is unhealthy to bottle up girls
who have had dates and a few sex thrills just at their most
dangerous adolescent period. It's natural for a young girl to be
restless and to seek excitement. And if she's subjected to too
strict discipline and her normal contact with boys is taken away,
she may find the wrong outlet for her energy.

     "And that is particularly true in Jane Alice's case. She is
slightly over-sexed. Right now, she feels a natural aversion to men
and to sex. She feels that she got a dirty deal. That might recoil
into Lesbianism. I've seen young girls turn pervert from being
jilted, the death of their fiances or through unpopularity at a
sensitive period. Too, Jane Alice doesn't want to forget this too
easily for fear she may decide that the whole business wasn't so
bad. She needs a normal life, but she also needs the supervision of
people who know what she's done."





                         
                  
                               89

                

     Mr. B was a sensible man, as I have said. "I see what you
mean," he agreed. "I've given this matter a lot of thought, because
Jane Alice is an only child and it looks as though two fairly
intelligent persons ought to make a success of one child."

     He sighed. "I've tried not to be the sort of father who
forgets all about his youth and does a lot of aimless preaching.
That's why I gave Jane Alice as much freedom as possible and didn't
blame her over-much for what happened. And I'm relieved that Jane
Alice isn't posing as a sort of young Madame X, betrayed before she
was of age and being very dramatic in the best motion picture form.
She admits it was partly her fault. I'm under no illusion about my
child. She isn't overloaded with brains. She's too docile, and I
should have realized that and instead of trying to develop
initiative I should have relied more on obedience. But it's hard
for a man to judge his own child, and it's hard to remember the
damn-fool things I did when I was young. I never got any girls in
trouble," he added, "but it's a wonder I didn't."

     "Sometimes," he went on, "I think the savages handle these
things better. They pay more attention to puberty. They make a
ceremony of it and the girls have their womanhood more forcibly
impressed on them. Here we pass by puberty with a little bygienic
lecture and continue to regard the girls as children until they're
16 or 18, forgetting that from the ages of 12 to 14 they are,
physically, women."

     "I know," I told him. "Parents hate to see their children grow
up. It's worse in the mothers. They feel they've gone through more
for the children and they resent their sons' and daughters' leaving
home as soon as they're able to take care of themselves. A mother
bird will push her fledglings out of the nest. But the human mother
is more possessive. The children usually are ready to leave about
the time the mother's own sex life is going or gone. And somehow
that makes it harder for the mothers. So we get a mother who wants
her big son to escort her around and tries to behave like his
sister. And we get the type of mother who keeps her daughter at
home, preaching duty to her, and begging her not to marry until
after the mother's death. What she usually means is that she can't
bear the sight of her daughter having a happy sex life when she is
lonely and her own life is virtually ended as far as personal
pleasure is concerned."

     Mr. B went out after thanking me again. I heard afterward that
Jane Alice stayed in school and went in for athletics, hiking and
all sorts of outdoor sports which used up her dangerous energy. I
have never believed in the creed that children should be seen and
not heard, and I wince when a nervous mother urges her daughters to
sit in the corner and be quiet. The girls should be taught to be
well-mannered, of course, but they should have some outlet for that
well of restless energy. Otherwise they may come to me.








                         
                  
                               90

                

                   XII. STRANGER THAN FICTION

     About a week later I got a case that admirably illustrated Mr.
C's sympathy for the daughters of neurotic mothers.

     A very pretty young girl, with a defiant look in her soft dark
eyes, came in to see me. She had refused to give the office girl
her name, and I suspected immediately what she wanted.

     "You're going to say that my story sounds exactly like the
hokum in cheap magazines," she began.

     I smiled. "That doesn't mean it isn't true. Nor that the
stories in magazines aren't true to life. I know a writer who gets
all his material from the correspondence of a 'lovelorn' editor.
He's accused of being unreal and melodramatic, but he told me that
almost invariably he had to tone down the facts."

     "I'm in one of the usual triangles," she said. "And I'm in the
usual jam."

     "Tell me about it," I invited.

     "I want to begin way back. Because," she paused and gave me a
teary smile. "You see, I know something about you and I was told to
tell you the entire story because if I didn't you'd turn me down.
So I'll start with my very beginning. I was an unwanted child. My
mother had been a belle, and she made a good marriage. And then
right away I came along to spoil the fun -- and my mother's figure,
as I've had dinned into my ear's since childhood."

     It was a pathetic story she told, but I don't believe it was
exaggerated. She had been paraded around as a baby and her mother
had posed as a martyr to motherhood. But when she outgrew the cute
roly-poly stage and began to have long legs and arms and be a big
girl, she was shunted off to school in winter and camp in summer
rather than spoil her mother's lies about her age.

     "Mother has always claimed that she was a mere child when she
married," Dorothy said bitterly, "As a matter of fact, she wa's 24,
and getting pretty nervous about being an old maid. I was kept in
short socks as long as possible. Finally father died and left me
some money, but in mother's care, and I wasn't to get it until I am
21. I'm 20 now, but I'm still mother's little girl. I'd started in
school so early and had it so concentrated that at 18 there wasn't
any place except college she could send me. And mother was afraid
of college. I don't know exactly why. She had the old-fashioned
idea that college made blue stockings out of women and I'd never
marry. She is vain enough not to want an old maid for a daughter,
although at the same time she doesn't want me to marry because then
she'd be a mother-in-law and perhaps a grandmother. She was afraid,
too, that college would make me strong-willed. Too, when I was away
at boarding-school it sounded as if I were about 12. She never had
any pictures made of me after I was 10. But a girl at college
sounds grown-up.




                         
                  
                               91

                

     She smiled again, a smile with no mirth. "That sounds awfully
bitter, but you never had it drilled into you that it was a crime
for you to grow up normally. Mother is always talking about what a
pretty child I was and sighing. And she worries for fear I'll be as
pretty as she was. I won't. I look more like father. Well, I came
home and I started dating a little in spite of anything mother
could do. I went away to visit some school friends and I met a
young engineer. I fell for him -- hard. He loved me, wanted to
marry me. But he wanted to do everything in the traditional
fashion. He wanted to ask my mother for my hand. I was against
that. After all, I'm 20. And, I forgot to tell you, if I marry
after I'm 18, I get full control of my money without waiting until
I'm 21. Sometimes I think father put that clause in to encourage me
to marry and escape from mother."

     I nodded. "Go on," I told her. I knew the girl either had to
tell her story or go into hysterics. She'd been bottling it up too
long.

     "I fought against telling mother," Dorothy went on. "I knew
she'd do something to spoil it. Sandy couldn't understand. He
wanted me to meet his mother, who is also a widow. He thought it
would be nice for our mothers to get to be good friends. His mother
is a dear, old-fashioned but sweet. I knew mother wouldn't like her
and would make fun of her and I couldn't bear that. Sandy had a job
offered him with an engineering firm here and he wanted to take it
so that we could live close to our relatives. He'd been wandering
over the world, but he said it was no way for a woman to live.
Anyhow, he wanted children."

     "I knew it wouldn't work," she said, almost hysterically.
"Mother would fight it. She couldn't bear to have me living in the
same town and raising a family. She'd break up our marriage, if we
were allowed to be married. I wanted to elope and go to South
America where Sandy could work. But he was tired of living there."

     She smiled ironically. "Finally, I did get him to go away with
me for a week-end or so. I told him that I was modern and believed
people should find out if they are sexually mated before they were
married. He was a little shocked at first, but he wanted me, too.
After that, he insisted that we must be married right away just in
case anything happened. And he was more determined to meet mother.
So he came here. I thought that I could tell mother that we had
been lovers and shock her into letting us marry. But she beat me to
it."

     She shuddered. "Oh, it's too horrible to talk about!" "I can
guess," I said. "You mother is shrewd and she saw what sort of a
man your lover was. So she told him you weren't a good girl."

     "Worse than that. She first told him that I was under 18 and
couldn't marry without her consent. But he knew better than that
because I'd told him about all the schools I'd gone to and pretty
well outlined my life. But I'd never told him the truth about
mother. His own mother was so different, you know, and I hate to
play the mistreated daughter. I thought he'd think less of me and
might wonder if I weren't like her, or if I were exaggerating. 
Anyhow, I am well dressed and well fed and fairly well educated. I
don't look mistreated."
                         
                  
                               92

                

     "And you were too happy to want to spoil it by talking about
your past sorrows," I suggested.

     She nodded. "They seemed somehow unimportant if I could escape
them with Sandy. But when mother saw that the under-age gag
wouldn't work, she went on. She got panicky and she didn't really
mean to say as much as she did. She's apologized since. But she
told him that I didn't want children and that I was over-sexed and
she'd had to send me to girls' schools to keep me out of trouble.
That wasn't true, of course, although," she hesitated for a moment,
"I'd done some rather indiscreet things in rebellion, such as
getting drunk with the wrong people, and going on wild parties. I
hadn't been a plaster saint, but I'd never had any sex experience
before. Mother is charming, she's, a good actress, and of course
Sandy believed her. It all fitted in neatly with my frantic desire
that we have each other before marriage. Mother even told him that
doctors had talked of giving me a sterilization operation but she
had refused, thinking I'd outgrow my indiscretions."

     The tears were rolling down her cheeks. She cried naturally.
like a child, not bothering to wipe away the drops. "I suppose I
behaved in a peculiar fashion, too, and that made things worse. I
knew mother was lying to him, but I didn't know what about and I
made some silly explanations designed to cover virtually everything
or anything. The next thing I knew, he told me that perhaps I was
right in saying it was all a mistake -- I told him that when I saw
him regarding me oddly. Now he's gone to South America. And," she
spread out. her hands, "here I am."

     "Have you told your mother you're pregnant?" I asked.

     "For God's sake, no. She'd use it as a lever over me all my
life or she'd ship me off to South America. As soon as she found
out that Sandy had gone away to work, she was sorry for what she'd
done. she'd thought, of course, that we'd live here. Then she told
me part of what she'd said and I guessed the rest and made her
admit It. Of course, it was partly, my fault. I was nervous, and
when Sandy began acting strangely I flared up instead of telling
him the truth. I was so upset I didn't know what I was doing."

     "Look," I said. "You came here for an abortion, but you don't
really want one, and so I'm not going to give it to you."

     She stared at me hopelessly. "You must. I thought at first I'd
have Sandy's child and salvage that much of him. But it's
impossible. I won't have any freedom until I'm 21. Oh, I've got a
little money, and I can pawn some things and pay your fee. But I
haven't enough to support me somewhere and take me through all the
trouble mother would make for me. She'd ruin it somehow."

     "I don't mean that," I told her. "You're going to follow your
man. You still love him or you wouldn't want his child. The trouble
with you is that all your life you've been afraid of your mother.
You were scared, or you would have saved yourself a lot of misery,
told Sandy the truth and gone with him to interview your mother.
You were a coward then. You went away and hid while he talked to
her. So now you've got to do something more courageous. You must go
to South America and find him."

                         
                  
                               93

                

     "I couldn't. I've got only the vaguest idea where he is. And
I don't want to force him into marrying me because I'm pregnant."

     I shrugged my shoulders impatiently. "And how do you think he
would feel if he ever heard the real story and knew that because of
false pride and cowardice you cheated both of you out of happiness?
You come home with me and my wife will talk to you."

     The upshot of it was that Norma went with her to Sandy's
mother.

     "She'll be horrified," Dorothy protested, "She's one of those
sweet, old-fashioned women."

     "Old-fashioned women know a lot about life," Norma told her.

     And Norma was right. She told me about it on her return.

     "I almost lost my nerve when we got there," Norma related.
"The set-up was too mid-Victorian for words. And there was Mrs. S,
a grandmotherly woman with white hair and an apple-blossom akin.
Dorothy got cold feet and I had to tell the story. I meant to skip
about Dorothy's wanting an abortion, but she blurted it out. The
old lady just clucked her tongue and kissed Dorothy.

     "Then she said it reminded her so much of an old woman who
wanted her daughter to look after her and so she told the poor
girl's beau that Maisie wasn't a nice girl. She wound up by saying,
'But poor Maisie didn't have your courage, my dear, or your money
and so there was nothing she could do about it.' She wasn't shocked
that Dorothy was pregnant. She just said, 'Such things happen to
the young, dear, and we who are old should be ready to help. That's
why we are here after our child-bearing duties are over.'"

     Mrs. S took things into her own delicate hands, and when Norma
left she was busy getting passports for them. She had introduced
Dorothy everywhere as her daughter-in-law and she had cabled her
son that she was coming to see him and bringing along her new
daughter.

     "I just told him that I'd explain later," she said. "I don't
think it best to surprise him. Sandy knows and trusts me, and he
probably has had time to think things over by now and realize his
mistake. But he's a wee bit stubborn, like all the Scotch."

     I like to think of Dorothy and her happiness. She and Sandy
were married upon her arrival, with Mrs. S beaming on them. It
helps Whenever I hear abortionists described as monsters who fatten
on child murder. I have never performed an abortion unless I felt
that it was best for humanity. And I have prevented many of them,
especially in the last few years.

     As methods have improved and women are wiser in birth-control
methods, more and more young women have lost their horror of the
whispered, "She got rid of the baby somehow." They come into my
office seeking an easy way out of their difficulties. But a lot of
them have gone out convinced that the hardest way might be the best


                         
                  
                               94

                

after all. To many of them I said, "Bring your man in here and let
me talk to him. This is his business, too. Don't get too modern.
You're not modern enough to escape the oldest of all biological
traps."

     There is something about a doctor's office that make's people
more humble, more ready to listen. I think it must be that each
sick, hopeless or hopeful patient leaves something of his patience
or his despair or his resignation in the atmosphere. People will
listen to things from a doctor that they will not take from anyone
else. Possibly it is because few doctors ever preach, and the
patient realizes that the doctor knows what he is talking about.

     When marriage to possible, I refuse to perform an abortion
merely to cover up carelessness. The patient may regret it later.
I am not in favor of shotgun marriages, but I have had literally
dozens of cases where abortions were refused and the marriages were
normally happy. Sometimes there is a difference in social position
and moneyed prestige. A society girl has an affair with a
workingman and is caught. She hates to face the disapproval of her
family, the possible ridicule of having married beneath her. If it
was purely momentary passion, I am not in favor of forcing a union
and allowing a child to be born when a divorce is inevitable and
the child will always be under a handicap.

     But if the affair has been going on for several months -- and
despite all the stories of conception after one sex act, it is a
rare thing -- then it seems to me that there is no reason why
marriage shouldn't follow, and I say so. And when two young working
people are selfishly intent on leading their own lives and want an
abortion for the girl because they are afraid the child and
marriage might interfere with freedom, I refuse to act.

     There has grown up in recent years a group of modern
mistresses, workingwomen who are afraid that marriage might
interfere with their jobs, who want to artificially prolong their
youth by not having children or other responsibilities. They say
that they intend to have sex anyhow, and they indulge in affairs of
long duration. Sometimes these women actually would make poor
mothers, and in that case an abortion is advisable. At other times,
I try to exert the slight pressure that is necessary to overcome
the idea that marriage would interfere too much with the designs of
their living.

     I have tried in this casebook to present a random selection of
patients. I have made mistakes. I have had women come in and blame
me for their sterility. They do not believe me when I tell them
that they have undoubtedly done something since the abortion to
cause their barren state.

     Likewise, I have had wives blame me for urging them into
marriages which proved unhappy. It did no good to point out that
there are many divorces not caused by the handicap of premature
childbirth.





                         
                  
                               95

                

     I played God a little in the case of Dorothy and Sandy because
I thought it worth the risk. If she had stayed with her mother, she
might have become promiscuous out of sheer rebellion. She admitted
having gone on wild parties as an emotional relief after a quarrel
with her mother. I wanted to avoid what happened in one case that
came to me.

     June's mother had been a pretty, spoiled village girl. She had
married a city man and lived happily for a while. But eventually
June's father was unfaithful to her mother. The mother discovered
it, and they were estranged. Denied his wife, the man went in for
a series of affairs. The wife had expected to find her husband at
her feet, begging for forgiveness, and became bitter when he was
not abject.

     She eventually separated from her husband and he gave her a
handsome settlement. The mother now exacted the utmost in slavery
from the daughter. June in rebellion took the obvious course. She
began a clandestine affair with an utter cad. She knew what sort of
a man he was, that is, she knew that he was reputed to be "wild."
But that lent more glamour to the affair. She went farther than she
intended, and found herself in a jam. So she came to me.

     "I didn't really love the man," she explained, "and I knew I
Was cutting off my nose to spite my face, but somehow I just went
on and on. If I tell mother, she'll say I'm my father's, daughter
and all the rest of my life she'll talk about how I ruined myself
and broke her heart."

     "When you get out of this mess, get a job and a little more
independence," I told her. "You're too old to be so childish. I can
understand how your mother drives you to do wild things. But you
don't want to spend your life playing the fool just because you
feel you're getting even with her. You can't be happy that way."

     "I know," she answered meekly. "I know i've made a darned fool
of myself. And I don't understand why I picked out this way of
trying to get even with mother. I just did. It seemed the worst
thing I could do to her."

     I didn't find that extraordinary. Sex is used frequently as a
weapon by the woman. The young girl, angry at her mother, thinks
"I'll run away" and adds as a postscript, that she'll run away with
some boy her mother dislikes. The angry wife withholds her caresses
and looks around for someone to whom she can give her body as
additional punishment to her husband.

     A young woman who frankly admits to 30 was talking to me the
other day about woman's use of sex,

     "People talk of feminine wiles and age-old tricks," she
remarked scornfully. "They talk about women not being
straightforward about sex. How can they? You've seen what happened
to girls who tried to meet man on his own ground."





                         
                  
                               96

                

     She paused a moment. "Probably I'm malicious. But I've got so
sick of men who want my body for a night or a few nights and expect
me to be delighted because they say so and because they admit that
they like me and are attracted by me. They feel that the mere fact
that they want me should cause me to submit immediately. They never
bother to inquire whether I feel the same way or whether I object
to being shopworn. But I'm going to have my fun some of these days.
There are two or three men I'm watching and I mean to have some
quiet laughs at their expense in about 10 years."

     "What do you mean?" I asked.

     "I know about half a dozen attractive men in their late 20's
and early 30's. They're all earning enough to support a wife but
they don't want one. They say that they want sex as an adventure.
They usually want one girl as a self-supporting mistress and then
perfect freedom to date any other girls they are attracted to. The
women don't like the idea; it robs them even of the security of a
steady boy friend. They can't even count upon an escort whenever
they want one; they have to find out whether their lovers have
other plans, and it keeps them from getting a matrimonial-minded
man. I know a couple of these gay dogs who are past 40. One already
has lost his manhood and another is losing his. Now they're
beginning to see the woman's viewpoint. They have to stand by and
watch younger men get the women they want. The women their own age
don't appeal to them, and they're having the novel experience of
being a little abject, of pleading to see women, of asking small
favors."

     I grinned. "I know what you mean. I've seen some of those
birds who claim they're prematurely impotent. Some of them are, of
course. But you'd be surprised to know how many men in their middle
40's, men who haven't taken any care of themselves and are in
generally poor physical condition, are hollering their heads off in
the privacy of a doctor's office."

     "Sure," she agreed. "I know one man who wasn't willing to make
any sacrifices to insure a lasting companionship. He didn't see any
women worth marrying or worth giving up his freedom for. Now he's
consumed with self-pity. He sees old age approaching and not much
more fun. So he wants some attractive woman to fall in love with
him and spend her life taking care of him. There are still women
who would marry him, but he doesn't want them. He's used to the
best. And he can't adjust himself to the idea that he's no longer
in a position to take what he wants. he's like a woman now. He has
to take what he can get.

     "A man told me the other day that he'd always been fair to
women; he'd never promised to marry any of them; they knew what
they were getting into when he had a sex affair with them. And he
never got them into any jams. Now he's full of self-pity because he
wants a woman and can't get her. She has never promised to marry
him, either. It never occurred to him that some of these women who
gave him pleasure may have fallen in love with him -- he was a
handsome devil -- and concealed it from pride. If a man tells a
woman he loves her, she usually feels that sometime he may get 



                         
                  
                               97

                

around to proposing. And a man has no compunction about asking the
girl if she loves him. That puts the whole affair on a higher
plane. And if she doesn't have hysterics or shoot him, he feels
that this is all right with her."

     "I know," I said. "A man cane to me the anther day and asked
if I could predict how much longer he could have an active sex
life. He was beginning to weaken. I told him it was impossible for
me to tell. He was about 50, and wasn't in very good physical
condition. He said that he wanted to marry a girl of about 25. He
would do it if he thought he could have sexual relations with her
for four or five years. He said that if he became immediately
impotent, he would not feel right about marrying her, but he
thought that after four or five years of married life he could
expect her to be faithful.

     "He was an old friend of mine, and I told him that he was just
laying up misery for himself. I asked him if he expected a girl of
30 to be faithful to a man of 55. He hemmed and hawed and said that
he knew she must have a sex life -- he thought in terms of sex
still rather than love -- and he wouldn't object as long as he
didn't know about it. He was willing to condemn the girl to
clandestine' affairs, to being the unfaithful wife of an old man,
in order to have four or five years of happiness. And, of course,
he would be jealous and suspicious. Most of these old men with
young wives are."

     "Naturally," the woman said. "He'd tell her that he understood
her need for sex, but he'd see that she felt guilty, and he'd
torment her by trying to find out about it and telling her that all
her men friends were scoundrels."

     I chuckled. "You've got him right. He then told me that he'd
let her divorce him if she wanted to -- but I didn't take that too
seriously, either. Men in that condition will promise virtually
anything. Then he said that she'd be left a moneyed widow when she
was a little past 30, and she could have plenty of time to have her
fun."

     "It would serve him right if he married her and she was
flagrantly unfaithful and let him know she was waiting for him to
carry out his promise to die and leave her his money," the woman
exclaimed. "I told you I was a little soured on this sex business.
In the past 10 years, I've had several affairs. Some of them have
left pleasant memories and some not so nice. But when I try to
count the men of all ages, descriptions and previous, condition of
servitude who have made me proposition's, and men who have let me
get into trouble through their carelessness and expected me to get
out by myself, well, it doesn't seem very pleasant."

     She looked at me and grinned. "I don't mean the time I came to
you, either. Larry was all right then. He did his duty. But I must
say that he was content to sit back and furnish his share of the
money and let me make the arrangements. Which is one reason why I
didn't use any of the much-vaunted feminine wiles to try to trick
him into marriage. Of course, I know it was in character for Larry
to be quiet and easy-going. But I admit that I would have admired 
him more if he hadn't stood back so meekly and let me handle it."

                         
                  
                               98

                

     I laughed. "You modern girls yell for equal rights, and when
you get them you're peeved because men don't try to dominate you
and don't do everything for you."

     "Well put," she agreed. "But there's another viewpoint,
Martin, in my world, where sex frequently is a casual matter -- to
judge from some of the propositions made me -- there are only a few
ways of knowing when a man really cares for a woman. I'm always
skeptical of the word, love. There are so many varieties, ranging
from momentary passion and infatuation or friendly fondness to the
honest to gosh till-death-do-us-part kind. And this womanly
intuition business has been greatly overrated. I've heard men say
that a woman always knows somehow when a man really loves her.
That's bosh. Women have a keener eye for deception in people they
don't love; and frequently they try to kid themselves and others
when they really know better.

     "When it all boils down, there are only three or four ways in
which a woman can be reassured that a man loves her. And those
don't always work. One is when he offers her a wedding ring. Larry,
for instance, told me that he loved me as much as if we were
married, I always thought when he said that, 'Well, why don't you
ask me to marry you, then?' He got angry once when I said I
couldn't believe in him, and asked me whether a wedding ring were
the only way I could be sure of him. He pointed out that there
wasn't anything sure about marriage. I knew that, of course, but
what he didn't realize was that to a woman a proposal doesn't
merely meat that the man is signifying his willingness to be
branded as the woman's property, but that he is anxious that the
woman be known as his wife.. No woman like's to be told merely that
she can be sure of the man. She wants the man to want to be sure of
her. Otherwise, she has a feeling that he's a little
condescending."

     "Male egotism," I explained. "So that's why you didn't want to
marry larry?"

     "Partly," she admitted. "And he wasn't jealous enough. I had
no way of knowing whether this was perfect faith or utter
indifference, and sometimes I needed assurance that it wasn't
indifference. As it was, at times I got the idea that he didn't
really give a damn what I did so long as it didn't interfere with
his having me when he wanted me, or reflect on his reputation, or
keep him from his other social pleasures."

     "Marriage and jealousy then," I ticked them off on my fingers.
"What are the other things a woman needs as proof of love?"

     "illustrated again by Larry," she replied. "Now Larry said
later he would have been glad to arrange all the disagreeable
preliminaries for my abortion. But the point is, he didn't rush up
with the offer at the time and he didn't insist. God knows how many
times I've heard men say -- after I've expressed the suggestion --
'If I had known you wanted to go, I'd have been delighted to fix
it.' They may have been sincere, but it sounds like lip-courtesy,
especially since they didn't do anything more about it. Now I will
ask favors of men who mean little to me -- or who perhaps are good
friends of mine. But I want my lover to make offers of service 

                         
                  
                               99

                

because he wants to, not because I suggested it. And once in a
while I want him to override my wishes if he thinks it is best for
me. Now you are a friend of mine. But if I told you I was going to
get drunk, you'd shrug your shoulders and think it was my business.
As a matter of fact, you wouldn't care enough to find out who I'd
be drinking with. I don't expect more from you. But from a lover,
I'd want a little more interest in my welfare."

     "You want perfection," I told her.

     "No," she protested, "I don't mean that I should always be the
passive member of the couple. But I'd want some assurance that he
thought of me without my having to call his attention to me.
Otherwise, I'd never know whether he was genuinely anxious to be
with me."

     She grinned. "We sound so smart we ought to write a book about
clandestine sex."

     "I am," I told her. "I've kept a sort of casebook and I'm
compiling an informal record of them. I thought it might show some
of my stuffed shirt friends there's more to sex than the birth and
wedding notices,"

     "How are you going to end it." she asked.

     "I don't know. I've been lucky so far. I'm happily married,
with two children. Sometimes I think that the reason I am happily
married is because other people make my mistakes for me. And so far
I've been pretty lucky. Of course by the time the book comes out I
may be in prison."

     "Let me finish it," she asked eagerly. "I like to come over
here and talk to you, knowing that you'll regard it as a
confessional. I can't talk about these things to the men and women
I know. It might do me some good to get it off my chest, and it
might do others some good to hear the woman's side of the case.

     "All right," I agreed.

     "You can present the sex situation from an impersonal
viewpoint," she explained with an ironic grin, "and I'll give the
story of the fallen woman, 20th Century style."

     "So be it," I said. "I am never satisfied with endings,
anyhow. The happy ending's make me feel that if I look on the front
page tomorrow I'll see a divorce suit being filed. And when I see
tragic endings I know that presently the characters will begin to
feel that life isn't so bad after all and a good meal or a stiff
drink is in order."

     And so my book ends, appropriately enough, with the first
person story of one of my patients. Its writer will remain
anonymous, without even the cloak of a fictitious first name. A
week after our talk my patient brought it to me, neatly typed. I
found it an absorbing human document. She told me that she had kept
a diary at the time. I present it in her own words.


                         
                  
                               100

                

                     XIII. ONE GIRL'S STORY

     When you mention the word "abortion," most people either laugh
or look avidly interested, depending on whether you are being
general or personal in the discussion.

     The discussion won't be in the first person, singular, because
an abortion is one strictly feminine operation women don't talk
about. That sounds like a joke. It isn't to one who has gone
through the hush-hush business of having one.

     Married women have bored we by dwelling on the details of
their sacrifice and pain in childbirth. But the unmarried girl is
silent about the torture, mental and physical, she endured to
prevent an unwelcome child entering a hostile world. Her silence is
part of her punishment. And no small part. Not for her the sympathy
lavished on the ill or the bereaved. She has to smile before,
during, and after her premature accouchement.

     By my code of ethic, an abortion was the only possible curse.
My lover and I had not wished to marry, before I became pregnant.
There was no reason why accidental conception should force us into
a repugnant marriage. I had no moral scruple's against ridding
myself of the "mistake." I could see no difference between an
abortion and use of contraceptives.

     At times, I felt that I would like to have a child. I even
speculated regarding its probable traits and appearance. Even now,
I sometimes find myself wondering what the child would have looked
like, figuring out how old it would be and speculating regarding
any change it would have made in my life. But thus far I'm glad
that I did not have it.

     I did not want to bring an illegitimate child into the world.
I had decided ideas upon what a child's upbringing should be. It
would not be fair to myself to jeopardize my reputation and my
possible career, and the same thing was true regarding my lover. I
did not want the responsibility; neither did the father. It would
be impossible for me to even support the child decently. I had no
right to bring a child into the world under such circumstances.

     I was, I believe, exceptionally lucky. I obtained, easily a
small amount of ready money. I was able to spend a short time away
from my home without suspicion attaching to my sudden departure. My
lover shared the expenses, and we were able to keep the affair
secret. At times during that dreary period when my family doctor
thought it best to wait and see if my menstruation had not simply
been delayed, I wanted to talk about my fears, to argue aloud. in
order to convince myself that I was being foolish. Again, I wanted
to try to forget the whole business. I even thought about remaining
drunk or at giddy parties the remainder of the time I must wait, I
resent my constant worry. I sought easy physical tasks which would
occupy my hands and mind and shut out thought. It was a strain to
carry on a normal conversation. I'd forget for a few minutes. and
then back would come the nagging worry.




                         
                  
                               101

                

     The doctor had thought I might have just skipped a
menstruation period, because there had been a tiny flow. As time 
approached for the deciding period, I was obsessed with a desire to
get it over with. I was optimistic with the doctor. But I was
secretly convinced that I was pregnant. Time dragged and then
spurted. I had the usual wish-fulfillment dreams in which I fancied
that I was menstruating normally. They caused me unpleasant
awakenings and a dread of going to sleep. I acquired an unhealthy
curiosity about my anatomy. Was my indigestion nausea? Was a chance
abdominal pain the stirring of menstruation? I feared to complain
about any petty ailment, thinking it might be recognized as a tell-
tale symptom. Any chance joke about pregnancy made me grow cold.

     Since childhood I had suffered from nervousness. Now I feared
that the additional mental strain might cause me to become
hysterical and blurt out the truth or might cause a nervous
breakdown which would make more difficult the coming ordeal.

     I was in a state of complete jitters during the all-important
few days when I should have been menstruating. Then I bolstered
courage for a decisive visit to my doctor.

     An hour's wait in the outer office gave ample time for
phrasing and rephrasing the essential questions. I eyed the other
patients and envied them their ailments. They didn't have to hide
their symptoms or worry about a listening nurse.

     I told the doctor that nothing had happened. Afterward it was
odd to think this was the worst of many visits to doctors. Later it
became a matter of course, the way was smoothed before me, doctors
were more adroit about relieving nervous strain.

     This doctor wasted no time in being tactful. He put his
fingers together and looked thoughtful. "You'd better have an
examination," he advised.

     I kept up a running flow of chatter which deceived neither of
us into thinking that I was taking the matter lightly. All the time
my mind was repeating, "This can't happen to me. Not to me. This is
the sort of thing that happens to stupid girls."

     The doctor probed. It hurt. I winced.

     "You're pregnant all right," he said. "Two months." I felt a
little numb, a little relieved. At least I knew. But I wanted to
get out of there quickly.

     "So that's that," I remarked. "I'm a fallen woman. How much do
I owe you?"

     "Two dollars." He helped me with my coat and gave me a
friendly slap on the back. "I'm sorry," he observed. "It's just a
bad break."

     I went out into the waiting-room. I said something funny to
the girl attendant. I met some old friends on the street. They were
genial.


                         
                  
                               102

                

     "How are you getting along?" asked a man who had once had a
romantic attachment for me.

     "Just fine," I smiled. It was funny, I thought, how many
people must be saying "just fine" when they felt like the devil.

     I flattered myself that I was taking all this very well. I
hoped that I could maintain my composure when I got into a
sympathetic atmosphere. I went into the hotel room where my lover
was waiting for me. I tried to keep my smile from sliding. I was
afraid my eye's were filling with childish tears. I told myself
that I must behave like an adult, facing a problem that had been
met by thousands of persons.

     "I want a drink," I told him. I held the highball in my hand
and sipped it while I gave the doctor's verdict. I lit a cigarette.
I thought that it certainly helped along my appearance as a fallen
woman to sit in a hotel room with a cigarette and a highball while
I listened to what, in my hyper-sensitive condition, seemed an
interminable discussion of plans and the necessity for secrecy.

     God knows that I didn't want to broadcast the news. But I felt
so ungodly tired. I wanted bed and rest and the friendly
unawareness of my family. I knew these arrangements had to be made.
But it seemed to me that the same things were being said over and
over again. I suppose they were. My lover probably was nervous,
too, although he didn't show it. His very calm irritated me.

     I wonder now if I had to do it over again whether I would try
to be so gay and gallant. Probably it looked as if I were frivolous
and didn't take it very seriously. Maybe if I hadn't tried to act
so brave and efficient, Larry wouldn't have seemed so far away.
Perhaps I should have gone feminine and helpless. I don't know.

     Anyhow, it was decided that I should go to a nearby city where
a friend of mine would arrange things. I live there now. I made a
suitable excuse and drove away. Ordinarily I like going anywhere
and part of the day I managed to enjoy the trip. But there was the
strain of explaining things to the friend, getting his assistance.
I had told him during my waiting period that I might require his
help. I knew that he was a friend of several doctors and would be
in a position to help.

     I told my friend, and I tried to tell myself that the reason
Larry did not go along was because it was difficult for him to get
away from work, it would be doubly expensive for us both and it
would increase the danger of being found out if we were both away
from home at the same time.

     I realized that there was no real need for him to go with me.
X could handle this business with more efficiency and more secrecy,
but at the same time I wished Larry had wanted to go or had asked
to come up and bring me back. That trip home was beastly lonely as
I remember It.





                         
                  
                               103

                

     I checked in at the hotel and went to see X. He was
sympathetic but a little brusque about my foolishness in getting 
into a jam. He asked why I didn't marry the man. I tried making
explanations, and they all sounded foolish, so at last I said
bluntly that I didn't want to and that was that. He agreed to help,
and I went back to my hotel. Books I had brought failed to hold my
attention. The room seemed first too hot and then too cold. My
dozing was nightmarish.

     There were moments that first night when the whole thing
seemed to be only a trifling incident; others when it loomed up as
a calamity and I broke out in cold sweat, remembering my cowardice
about physical pain, my utter ignorance of the whole procedure. I
had to trust blindly to X.

     I told myself that it was foolish that I should be so upset.
The morning dragged while I waited for a telephone message from my
friend. On the radio a laconic female voice chanted, "Everything's
been done before. I just want to do what's been done before." The
telephone rang. "Everything is O.K.," X said.

     I rushed over for a conference. A medical friend had agreed to
arrange it. But he refused to take my doctor's finger examination
verdict. There must be a laboratory verification. So I bought a
rabbit.

     The rabbit cost me $15 and 36 hours of waiting.

     Oddly enough this period of waiting, while nerve-wracking, did
bring a strange relief from other worries. My fate for the next few
days was in the hands of impersonal scientists. I hoped, of course,
that the test would be negative. But this was one decision I did
not have to make. And suddenly it seemed to me that I was
unutterably weary of making decisions. People had said that I was
gay and carefree, with 'nothing to worry about' They little knew of
the complications of my private life, my worrying over whether I
had made a mistake in turning down a man who loved me and wanted to
marry me in order to pursue a futile affair with a man who did not;
the constant speculation over, whether I hadn't better leave the
hole thing behind and go somewhere else, start life over again.

     Finally the 36 hours were over. I went back to the doctor's
office.

     "We can kill it any time now," he reported cheerfully. "Come
on into the laboratory. A magnificent rabbit, must weigh four
pounds. We'll have it for supper tonight, in a stew."

     The thought of the doctor's family dining with pleasure on my
rabbit amused and yet slightly irritated me. After all, I had paid
$15 for that rabbit, and spent 36 hours worrying over its health.
I Wondered if medical etiquette required my presence while. it was
being eaten. Apparently not; and I was a little relieved, for it
would have seemed like cannibalism to me.

     The doctor killed the rabbit by injecting air into its
arteries. Then he opened it, and fished out two tiny pink objects 
with purple spots on them. They Were the ovaries.

                         
                  
                               104

                

     "There you are, my dear," he said genially. "Very positive
reaction. Those purple spots are hemorrhages on the ovary. It's the
only positive test. You're pregnant. No doubt about it."

     He carefully put the pink objects away on a piece of paper.
Then he cleaned the rabbit in the sink and wrapped it in a section
of brown paper before putting it in a refrigerator, crammed with
specimens of one kind and another.

     "I'll save these ovaries," he observed. "Some of the younger
doctors are interested in these tests, and may want to know what
they look like."

     So, indirectly, I was making my contribution to science.

     He telephoned the surgeon, and they amiably discussed their
respective healths and when I should appear on the scene. It seemed
that the surgeon was ready to leave his office, so I should come
the next day. This meant an extra day's waiting, of course, but
time and tide in such things mean little to the doctor.

     "Now cautioned the doctor. "You must remember not to breathe
a word of this to anyone."

     "Of course," I agreed.

     "The surgeon is not doing this for financial reasons," he went
on. "He is no quack. But he and I feel that there are times when it
is better for humanity that some children should not be born. I
understand that in your situation it would mess up the child's life
as well as your own and that of your lover. It is a racial waste,
for your child probably would be a fine, healthy one. But I believe
we are justified in aborting you for sociological reasons."

     My friend, I think, had exaggerated things Slightly in
explaining to the doctor why I could not marry. But I did not feel
it best to say anything Just then. So I went back to the hotel,
which was beginning to pall on me. I didn't think it best to spend
too much time with my friend. I realized that at the moment I was
far from an agreeable companion. I read until my eyelids would
close in defiance of my will, and my mind would refuse to
concentrate on the contents of the printed page.

     The next day I went to the surgeon's office. The first doctor
had given me a note of introduction. Life seemed to be a succession
of appointments and introductions and doctors' offices.

     Doctor A was a likeable middle-aged man with a friendly
manner. He frightened me at first by telling me briskly that I
would need a nurse and probably would have to stay in the city for
at least another week and possibly 10 days. It would be best for me
to get a little apartment.

     Obediently I checked out of my hotel and registered in the
apartment hotel he suggested. Then I returned to his office and
waited while the reception room slowly cleared of patients. There
were magazines that I tried to read without much success, The 
office attendant telephoned for my nurse.

                         
                  
                               105

                

     "You won't need her until tomorrow," she explained casually.
"You'll get along all right tonight. Then tomorrow, about 11, you
can come down here and meet her."

     "Here?" I asked incredulously. I fully expected to be borne
away from the doctor's office in an ambulance. The next day I
supposed I would be moaning and tossing in my bed, yelping for
morphine."

     "Sure," said the nurse. "You'll be able to walk a few blocks
tomorrow, all right. Walking's good for you, anyway."

     Doctor A stood in the doorway.

     "You're the next victim," he grinned. "I'll give you a little
treatment and send you on your way rejoicing."

     I didn't answer. With all the joyous sensations of a condemned
man -- there wasn't even a hearty breakfast to cheer me up, for I'd
been too nervous to eat -- I walked into the office. The low tones
of the nurse and the doctor, the whispered consultations, had been
entirely too reminiscent of the death room.

     "Better take off your coat and hat," he suggested,

     I obeyed, and began unfastening my dress, looking around for
the traditional white nightgown buttoned down the back.

     "No need to take off your dress," he explained cheerfully.

     I sat down on a white table, of a type that was becoming all
too familiar, and hooked my feet in the stirrup-like circles. The
doctor squeezed some white salve out of a tube, and then I felt him
probing. "Don't I take an anesthetic?" I asked, although nothing
very painful had been done to me so far.

     "Of course not," he replied, and launched into a discussion of
the jitters he'd had when his tonsils were cut out.

     He was probing with some instrument now, and I winced a
little.

     "I don't see how you girls stand this," commented the doctor
cheerfully. "It hurts me just to do it."

     "Oh, it isn't so bad," I hastened to assure him.

     He turned away and washed his hands.

     "You can sit up now," he said. "That's all."

     I sat up. I stared.

     "You mean," I paused for emphasis. "You mean that this is all
you  do?"

     "That's all the first treatment," he answered.


                         
                  
                               106

                

     I felt like laughing. I felt like crying. There was such a
sudden let-down in all the courage I'd bolstered for a painful
operation. I didn't feel any different. I didn't feel as if I'd had
an abortion. It wasn't any more painful than the examinations I'd
had before.

     "Sit down and get your breath," the surgeon suggested.

     "But I thought you had to cut something out, and then stuff me
full of medicated gauze," I protested. This abortion business
seemed too good to be true.

     "Oh, that's the old French method. That's a barbarous
business, and dangerous. I never do that any more. Nowadays I just
loosen the  membranes, and let nature expel the thing in the
natural way."

     He told me the name of this new method, but the word meant
nothing to me. It seemed to have something to do with heat.

     "I've had thousands of cases, and never a failure yet. High
school girls, girls your age, older women -- all ages. You're
healthy and fit -- you won't have any trouble. Keep on your feet,
eat and drink anything you want, except alcohol, but don't smoke
too much. Take these two pills tonight, and your nurse will tell
you what to do tomorrow. You'll run a temperature tonight, and
perhaps have a chill, but don't worry. You'll be all right."

     I was all right. I went jubilantly back to the apartment, too
jubilantly I learned later. I felt like toe-dancing. Instead, I ate
five sandwiches, drank a bottle of beer and literally quarts of
water and felt very good indeed. The high temperature came in due
time, I took the pills, which were shiny, black, deadly-looking
things. I learned later that they were merely laxatives. Then I
settled down to await developments.

     Developments arrived promptly the next morning. First came the
original doctor, with the cheering news of the price, which was $50
more than I had been led to expect. I was to pay $125. But before
I had much time to worry about that, there came a peremptory
telephone call, urging, me to hurry down to the surgeon's office to
meet my nurse.

     "Better get a rubber sheet," urged the first doctor genially.
"Be sure to get it right away, before you expel this thing, because
it won't do you any good afterward. And your worst is yet to come,"
be added. "You won't get off this easy."

     The "worst" began within 15 minutes. I perceived now why the
surgeon had said "your first treatment" on the preceding day.
Treatment Number Two hurt more. I began to feel less gratitude
toward the surgeon. He was no longer one of the Lord's anointed
tome. He was, I thought bitterly, getting plenty for what little
he'd done. I remembered the first doctor's admonition to keep quiet
about this matter. It gave me some pleasure to feel that Doctor A
was partially in my power. I could hurt him, too. I could send him
to jail. I toyed with the idea.


                         
                  
                               107

                

     My thoughts were interrupted by the entrance of a tall gray
haired woman. She was wearing rubbers, and carried an umbrella. She
was the nurse.

     "This is Miss K," said the surgeon. "She'll tell you what to
do."

     She certainly did tell me what to do, and I obeyed meekly. She
began immediately by commanding me to walk back to my apartment
hotel where she ordered some groceries and hurried the maid around
with a great air of authority. Everybody around the hotel seemed to
know her. Evidently she had had numerous patients at the same
place.

     The first part, and apparently the most important part, of my
program was to get plenty of exercise. My God! I'd thought that for
once in my life I'd be coddled. It seemed to me that I'd done a
God's plenty of walking. Now I felt I should lie in bed and be
waited on by this scrawny female. Was I paying this homely woman $6
a day just to make me walk and boss me around?

     We walked downtown and Miss K ate a hearty lunch at my
expense. Then we shopped. We bought a pink rubber sheet for 29
cents -- the clerk said that pink was best for babies. A huge
package containing four dozen sanitary napkins of a popular brand
cost me 62 cents, a package of safety pins was 10 cents. Then we
added a 25-cent bottle of a well-known disinfectant, two shiny pie
pans at a nickel apiece and two wash cloths ditto. After that we
walked back. The nurse went to bed.

     I bought two dollars' worth of groceries to feed her, and 30
cents; worth of newspapers for her to read. The newspapers would
come in handy later, anyway, she said. They did. For days I had to
lie on newspapers atop a crib sheet. A smooth sheet felt utterly
luxurious to me after hot rubber, rough towels and crackling
newspapers.

     Miss K lay comfortably on the davenport while I walked the
floor, according to her instructions. Occasionally she would
inquire how I was feeling. I gathered from the conversation with
one of the maids that I was supposed to be taking treatment for
hemorrhoids at a nearby clinic. The maid had hemorrhoids, too, and
I had to listen to a long dissertation on her symptoms.

     My friend purchased a small bottle of whisky the nurse ordered
for me. She thought that he was my lover, and called him "your
friend" with tactful emphasis. This amused me considerably. She was
always suggesting that I go to the movies or something with him,
and, I had to tactfully decline and stay at home with her. I surely
was taking good care of that nurse.

     I escorted her downtown again at night to fill her to the brim
with expensive grub. She had a mania for cafeterias, where shed
displayed an uncanny knack at picking out the most costly dishes.





                         
                  
                               108

                

     Accustomed to walking, I took a malicious delight in leading
Miss K at a rapid pace. She had corns, I learned early in the day. 
Thereafter, I was hell on exercise, except in domestic duties
around the apartment. She stopped in front of every fur shop to
gaze in admiration at the mink wraps. I reflected bitterly that I
could have decked myself in splendor on the costs of my present
pleasure-excursion. It was getting pretty monotonous, this
patrolling the city and waiting for The Pains, which were always
capitalized by Miss, K's slow voice. I vented my irritation in
malicious thoughts about, my nurse, who wasn't a bad sort at all.

     Promptly at 9:30, I was sent to bed. Miss K was horrified at
my suggestion that we leave the light on for a while, so that I
could read myself to sleep. I lay there in the dark, feeling
aggrieved. I am accustomed to reading before I go to sleep. It
helps me to relax. The more I thought of it the more militant I
felt. I rolled; I tossed. By God, if I couldn't read, she shouldn't
sleep. I was beginning to have aches and pains, too. I felt very
bad.

     I had to lie there in the dark and suffer in silence, because
this old dame didn't read anything but the newspapers. Naturally
she had no sympathy with night consumption of great literature. I
began thinking of all the nasty things I could say about her.
Greatly pleased with these fancies, I drifted off into a series of
hellish nightmares and chill's. My nurse had appropriated two-
thirds of the blankets. In the morning I was delighted to learn
that she had slept badly and that her head hurt. My head hurt, too.
I, hurt all over.

     She cooked my breakfast and washed the dishes. Meanwhile, she
informed me that the doctor almost had pneumonia. I was overjoyed.
She forced me to walk to the doctor's office. I grew sick to my
stomach sitting in the close, hot room. My pains were worse but as
yet I knew I had not had The Pains.

     I viewed with interest the entrance of a pretty young girl I
had noticed with an elderly couple at my first visit. I had thought
it odd the way they had entered the doctor's office, first papa,
then mama and daughter while papa came out. Then mama and daughter
stood in the hall while papa went back in. Daughter hadn't looked
very happy.

     Today she whispered something to mama and remained standing.
I glanced downwards. By their feet ye shall know them! Her trim
pumps had been replaced by scuffed oxfords suitable for walking.

     She looked worried. She glanced at me curiously. I resisted an
impulse to say, "Walking certainly is fun in this damned cold,
rainy weather, but if you get tired of it you can climb stairs or
get some lovely jolting on street cars. Come over to my place.
We've got a roof garden and we can walk together."

     The doctor treated with glee the news that I felt terrible. He
gave me another treatment. I was getting along beautifully he
observed. A doctor doesn't believe beauty is only skin deep. When
be wants to flatter you, he talks about your healthy liver and 
kidneys, A doctor's courtship ought to be a novel experience.

                         
                  
                               109

                

     We walked, Miss K ate a delicious lunch at my expense. I was
getting it in the neck for all the times I'd been entertained at
lunch. I couldn't remember ever having paid the cheek for any woman
before and I sure wouldn't pick out this half-deaf woman for a boon
companion. I brought her home and put her to bed. I was sick to my
stomach and couldn't sleep. It was no hardship to keep from
smoking. I couldn't even consume the three cigarettes a day I was
allowed.

     "That's fine," the doctor exclaimed, clapping me on the back
next day. "We want you to be sick to your stomach. Are you holding
your meals?"

"Yes."

     "That's fine," he commented. "You must eat to keep up your
strength. But we want you to be sick to your stomach. And ache. You
must ache. You're doing fine."

     I wasn't really sick to my stomach, anyhow, he added. It was
my uterus being disturbed. I didn't know anything about cause, but
I knew how I felt.

     Nausea returned three-fold that night. I refused to go to a
restaurant, and my nurse allowed me to purchase half a grocery-
store. She had told me previously that she had lived for years with
her mother. Mama must have done the marketing, for Miss K, who was
quite at home in a cafeteria, was nonplussed by the absence of
price signs in the grocery. She couldn't pick out the most
expensive items. It seemed to me that in my nervous condition I
should not be required to struggle with menus and marketing, along
with The Pains.

     I won my fight to read in bed and I went to sleep like a baby,
after my reading, while Miss K tossed restlessly all night. She won
her bacon for breakfast, but I absolutely refused the cooked
cereals. Abortions are bad enough, without oatmeal.

     The next day was Sunday, and the nausea became much worse.
About noon, we went to the surgeon's office again, and he gave me
another treatment -- like the others but much more painful this
time. During the process I burst into tears. Doctor A patted me
comfortingly on the back.

     Then came the long street-car ride which the doctor
prescribed, the idea being that the jolting movement was good for
what ailed me. After that I strolled through a zoo, where I peered
at a hippopotamus in a tank of water, and watched some kangaroo's
scratching themselves. That's what their small front legs are for,
I was told: to convey food to their mouths, to scratch themselves,
and to clasp the mate.

     I began to feel like hell on the way home. My nurse chattily
decided which of the town's most exclusive restaurants. would be
best, and we got off the car. Miss K lost interest in my jolting as
soon as her stomach began to feel empty., Once off the car, I
became so ill that I could hardly stand. I burst into tears again, 


                         
                  
                               110

                

and I felt a cold, deadly fury against the nurse. Was I paying her
$6 a day to drag me about to expensive restaurants, when all I
wanted was to lie quietly in bed? She suggested that I sit down on
the cold, concrete curb and relax, but it didn't appeal to me.
Finally she hailed a taxi, and I wept quietly all the way back to
the apartment.

     Once in my flat, I gave Miss K a dollar and invited her to go
out for her own lunch. As soon as she was out of the room, I
defiantly ate some cheese out of the refrigerator, and began to
feel a little better. Her starched smock, the general air of
neatness and what she called genteel conversation was getting on my
nerves.

     That night The Pains began. There was no difficulty in
recognizing them. They began slowly around the back and side, and
worked up to a grand climax in front. Miss K gave me a few lessons
in the ancient art of "bearing down." All the positions she
recommended seemed rather silly to me. I should stand up and put my
hands on the edge of the bed and "work!"

     Early in the evening "the Water burst." This seemed to please
the nurse. I hoped that everything would come to pass immediately,
but I wasn't to be a lucky patient. I had to "work" for what I got
and hard work, too. I spent a night of feverish agony and finally
went to sleep in the wee hours. I awakened very early, deathly sick
and having more pains than ever.

     "That's fine," said the nurse. She always hailed any symptom
of excruciating agony with pleasure. "I hope you vomit now," she
added. But I didn't. Just gagged and moaned loudly.

     "You mustn't make so much noise," she told be, when I wanted
to read the newspapers while I was "bearing down." "The people next
door will hear you."

     I felt like saying "To hell with the people next door," but I
didn't. You don't talk back to the nurse. But in my torment it
seemed a small matter whether the people next door heard me moaning
or rattling papers.

     Then she made me walk. When my whole body ached horribly, I
had to pace up and down the room until I collapsed on the bed with
a chill. The apartment seemed frigid, but Miss X was a fresh-air
fiend. She cheerfully invited me to breakfast.

     "Eat heartily," she urged. "It'll be good for you. You must
keep up your strength."

     But the thought of food nauseated me. I lay limp on the bed.
It seemed to me that Heaven could be no more than a bed and sleep.
"If you haven't done anything by 11 o'clock, you'll have to dress
and walk to the doctor's," the nurse threatened. I chilled again at
the thought.

     She gave me some quinine, but I was unable to swallow the
first capsule. It floated around in my mouth until it melted and I 
got the full benefit of the flavor. But I managed to down the
second one.
                         
                  
                               111

                

     The Pains went lower now. I was put to bed and a towel tied to
the end of the bed was given me to pull. I sat over one of the
shiny pie pans. I pulled. I grew red in the face. But I triumphed.
There was a sudden gurgle just as I thought I would explode -- and
the thing came.

     A wave of relief overwhelmed me. I felt a tremendous sense of
personal triumph. But the pain's were not over yet. Nor the
working. "Don't stop," the nurse warned. "If you have another pain,
work just as hard. We've got to get the afterbirth."

     I worked hard, but without success. Miss K sent me to bed.

     "Keep off your feet," she ordered. "We don't want to risk a
hemorrhage. Don't move any more than necessary."

     Her words were needless. I never wanted to stir again. I
rested. blessed rest, until the doctor came an hour later. But he
blasted my peace.

     "What are you doing in bed," he demanded.

     "The nurse put me here. She said to keep off my feet. The most
blessed words of tongue or pen. And I'm obeying orders implicitly."

     "Get back on your feet," he said. "There's some membrane yet
I want to see. Get up and move around."

     Wearily I shook the crumbs of toast from my bed-clothes. I
crawled out of bed, the bed I wanted to remain in the rest of my
life. I walked. Not much, but I walked. The whole discouraging
process had to be gone through again.

     There is a gap in the diary I kept then. I didn't feel like
writing. I didn't feel like walking either. But I had to walk. Each
day I had to walk to the doctor's office. He inquired if I were
flowing. I said I was. Then he told me to go home and walk some
more. He said I was getting along fine. I felt terrible. I was no
longer so horribly nauseated, but I was sore in every part of my
body. I alternately perspired until the sheets were drenched or
chilled all night long. Sleep was an unknown quantity. So was even
rest. The nurse had asked me whether I fainted easily. I said I did
not know; I had never fainted. But I felt if I got in crowds, I
would soon acquire the art of swooning.

     I could not eat in restaurant's. I simply groaned and looked
at the food. Finally Miss K allowed me to eat in the apartment. I
walked in the roof garden. I refused point-blank to go out except
to the doctor's office. I didn't want to faint on the streets or be
overcome by hysterical weeping in a restaurant. I didn't want to
see healthy, happy people.

     It is impossible, writing this later, to recapture the spirit
of dull, weary resignation, alternating with periods of frantic
worry about whether the afterbirth ever would come. I blindly
followed the nurse's orders. I even tried to be gay about it. She
said one patient had an easy time because she did the laundry. So 


                         
                  
                               112

                

dizzily I stood in the bathroom and washed out hose and lingerie.
I even laughed. I marveled at myself. I wisecracked. The nurse
enjoyed it. She made me repeat it all to the doctor. He enjoyed it,
too. He called me "darling" and said I was a star patient.

     The nurse said that I would have fun doing anything. It
required little effort for me to think of things I would enjoy
more. But I was determined to be gallant, so I kept up my hectic
gaiety. It helped. It kept me from weeping.

     Days lost meaning. I went in the morning or early afternoon to
the doctor's office. But he gave me no treatments. Then came
another night of sickening pain. My nerves were shattered. If I
dozed off uneasily, I had horrible nightmares. I spent a morning
pacing the floor and groaning. Part of the afterbirth came with
what seemed to me terrible straining. I took another capsule. The
doctor came to see me. Again the monotonous repetition of "Stay on
your feet. It has to come and it will. But it's being stubborn.
It'll take it's own sweet time. You can't tell from one patient to
another. It's really better to be slow. There's less danger of
hemorrhage."

     Then, unaccountably, I quit worrying. I ceased straining at
every pain.

     I knew that there were two things the doctor could do if I
didn't get results soon. He could give me a hypodermic which would
cause my muscles to move of their own accord and relieve me of some
of the pain and perspiration-evoking effort of "bearing down." Or
he could pack me, and that would bring the afterbirth immediately.
The last would be painful, but I was past caring about pain. I was
deadened by pain.

     Suddenly I felt care-free. They wanted me to walk, didn't
they? Well, I'd walk. I'd try the doctor's latest position. But I
was through worrying. Let them worry for a change.

     I slept better that night than I had for a week. The next day
I walked in the roof garden with the radio turned, on. I laughed.
I even danced a few steps. I felt better. I came downstairs and sat
up all morning. When the nurse asked me if I wanted to lie down, I
refused. I was tired of lying down. I ate some breakfast.

     I prepared to go to the doctor's office. But suddenly the
after-birth came. "I don't have to go to the doctor," I said as
calmly as possible.

     My battle was won. I submitted to going to bed, although I
felt fine. I wanted to go parading up and down the halls shouting
that the whole business was over. I wanted to go down to the
doctor's office and laugh in his face about this bearing down
business.

     But I went to bed. The nurse telephoned the doctor discreetly.
She smiled. The doctor came to see me and drank up the remainder of
the whisky I had not needed. I felt somehow proud that I had got
through it without drinking any whisky. I told the doctor I felt 
fine. The nurse went out to eat. I lay in bed and read. But I no
longer wanted to stay quiet and rest. I wanted to get up.
                         
                  
                               113

                

     Miss K soaked my breasts in camphor and tied me up tightly
with muslin, like a mummy. I looked thin-chested, The whole
business amused me. It was to prevent my breasts filling with
fluid. Some patients have a great deal of trouble with that, I was
told, and even had high fever. But I didn't. I lay in bed and read
and asked when I might get up. After all my desperate craving to
stay in bid for weeks, I now wanted to be up and going.

     There was one big pain when my uterus contracted. Then there
was peace. My nurse gave me sponge-baths and washed me with
disinfectant. I smelled like rotten eggs. But I felt fine. She gave
me castor oil. I didn't even mind that. I told the nurse it was a
conspiracy to keep me in the bathroom constantly, on one excuse or
another.

     I stayed in bed all that night and the next day. The next
night I was allowed to get up for a few minutes. I felt shaky and
weak and I broke out in perspiration when I moved. But there were
no pains. I had no hemorrhage. I was getting by fine.

     Next morning the doctor came to see me.

     "When can I go home?" I demanded. "I feel great. I don't want
to stay in this bed. My breasts aren't filling. Miss K took off the
bandage this morning. I'm all right."

     "Go home now if you want to," he told me.

     He shook hand's with me and departed. That afternoon I paid
the nurse. Sixty dollars -- but it, too, was virtually painless. I
felt a slight regret at seeing her go. Suddenly she seemed pitiful
to me. Poor Miss K with her life filled with patients and her
dreary home existence. I asked if she wanted the afternoon off. She
hadn't had any time off or much sleep.

But to my surprise, she wanted to spend the afternoon with me. She
had another patient moving in that night. She said I had been
pleasant. We exchanged polite statements about how nice every thing
had been. She said I got along fine and told me the troubles some
of her patients had. She didn't even mention the ones who paid her
$10 a day.

     I was still weak. When I washed the dishes, I went to lie down
twice. But I was restless. I couldn't remain quiet. I wanted to go
home. Now with the ordeal over, and the danger past, I worried
about trifles. Would I be able to stand the trip? Would I be able
to carry my luggage into the house? Would my alibi for the trip.
stand up?

     Miss K moved out. I read in bed until late. But it seemed odd
without her lying on the davenport. It seemed so quiet without her
asking me if I hadn't read long enough. I missed her slow voice
interrupting my reading with what at the time seemed tedious
anecdotes.





                         
                  
                               114

                

     My world had been composed of a doctor, a nurse, and a few
visits from my friend for two weeks. Now that world had 
disintegrated. I felt lonely. I thought about telephoning a few
persons I knew in the city. But that would be foolhardy. I was
registered under a false name. I didn't feel like entertaining or
giving any sort of story. I felt like getting tight. But I didn't
want to drink alone. Anyhow, I was still on a diet, no milk, no
cream soups, not much to drink in the way of alcoholic liquors.

     It was amazing how quickly the ordeal began to fade. It took
an effort to recall how the pains slowly surged forward, beginning
at my back and going all over my abdomen and increasing until they
were almost unbearable and then slowly going away. They had been
difficult to describe. Miss K would ask if they were worse than the
day before, but I could not tell. The day before had passed into
blankness.

     I cooked a leisurely breakfast. Then I took my crib sheet, my
pans, the remainder of the castor oil, the muslin I hadn't needed,
the disinfectant and the groceries I had left, in to the girl next
door. I felt it would be somehow fitting to make a gift to my
successor.

     She was a slim, pajama-clad girl with huge dark eyes and
jaunty dark curls piled atop her head. She moved restlessly around
her tiny apartment and smoked incessantly.

     "You'll have to cut down on cigarette's," I warned her.

     She gave me a startled look. "They hadn't told me," and she
crushed out her cigarette.

     "I'd forgotten," Miss K said. "But you have been smoking too
much."

     She looked in bewilderment at the pie pans. Miss K had washed
and disinfected them.

     "What are they for?" she asked.

     "You'll find out," I laughed.

     Miss K had asked me to tell her to relax. But I knew it would
be useless. You can't relax just because someone tells you to, You
can't be calm because someone say's that it's better for you. So I
told her. "It isn't so bad."

     "I'm not dreading it," she replied. I knew she was lying.

     "But she says she'll be home in two or three days," Miss K
chuckled. We were old-timers together.

"That's what I said," I remarked with a grin. "Are you nervous?"
Miss K gave me a warning glance. She didn't want me to make the new
patient fretful.

     "No. I'm not the nervous type. All that worries me is that I
wish it would hurry up and happen and they won't tell me when it 
will."
                         
                  
                               115

                

     I laughed. It was remarkably easy to laugh that morning. I was
going home that afternoon.

     "That's all that worries anyone. But you can't hurry it. just
walk and forget about time."

     "My feet are sore now," she complained. "They walked my legs
off yesterday. But I'm going home by Thanksgiving. I've got to get
home by Thanksgiving."

     It's a long time until Thanksgiving," the nurse soothed her.

     "You'll be home then," I said.

     She thanked me for the stuff . I'll pay you for it," she
offered. I shook my head. "You'll be paying for plenty of things."
She reached for a cigarette and then drew her hand back and glanced
at the nurse. Then she put her arms over her head.

     "Don't do that," I cautioned. "You've', got to keep your arms
down."

     "I didn't know." She meekly folded her hands in her lap.

     I felt sorry for her, and I wished I could make things easier
for her. But I couldn't. She looked at me curiously and I knew that
she hated my leaving her alone with the nurse. There was a strange
kinship between us. I was introduced to her, but I didn't catch the
name nor did I ask for it to be repeated. We were part of an army
of nameless women. I rather wished that she'd been there when was
and we could have walked together and exchanged complaints. But I
went away. We both smiled. And that was that.

     I thought that would be the end of my story, But it wasn't. I
went home. Everything went smoothly. My parents accepted my story
of an extended visit with friends. There was not much pain -- a
little, but nothing serious. But the nervous shock lingered on.
weak, irritable. I quarreled with my lover. He felt that I blamed
him. I felt that he blamed me. I wanted to be coddled and he wanted
to forget it.

     We had several serious quarrels about it and finally made up.
I felt that it would make me out a damn fool to go through that
ordeal for his sake and then quit going with him immediately. And
he may have felt the same way. But I fancied myself neglected. I
was sarcastic. My nerves gave way, and I had tantrums, not because
I wanted to but as a reaction from what I had gone through. I tried
to stop fussing, but it was a physical and mental condition beyond
control.

     I tried to explain this to him, and for a while we drifted on.
But looking back now at the wreck of our affair, I wonder just how
much effect it had on our breaking up. I believe a great deal.
Subconsciously I always felt that he should do something to make up
to me what I had suffered. I know, of course, that there was no
reason why he should. Certainly he regretted it and the whole
affair was an accident.


                         
                  
                               116

                

     But from time to time whenever I felt that I was being
neglected I would find myself thinking, "After all I've gone
through for that man." And if he took another girl out on a casual
date I resented it. I'd think bitterly, "And what has she endured
for him?"

     Before we had boasted that ours was a free and easy
companionship. Now I rather resented that term. I had refused to
assert my claims at the logical time but somehow I felt that my
ordeal should give me some privilege and I was exasperated when
treated as just the "girl friend." I felt like flaring up and
saying, "Oh, no, there's nothing really between us. He was just the
father of my unborn child." But I didn't. And eventually I went
away. He was a little bewildered and a little angry. But I had been
bewildered and angry too long.

     I know that the episode had one lasting effect. It made me
take sex more seriously. It gave me a horror of "free and easy"
companionship.

     One of the first people I looked up when I moved to the city
was the doctor. One reason was that it gave me mental relief to
talk over the case. I got rid of a lot of bitterness by dragging it
out of the past and learning that other girls had quarreled with
their lovers and that my nervousness and resentment were natural.

     The doctor says that as long as he continues in his profession
there can be no logical ending for his "confessions." Likewise
there can be no real ending for my story, for there always will be
a tiny mental sear.

     But now that I have come nearly to the close, there are a few
things that I would like to say to other girl's. Don't confide your
own story even to your closest friends unless you have used them
for alibis. Then better make up some other story if you can. There
will be a slight coolness or you may imagine there is, which is
just as bad. You'll be greeted with, "But how did you happen to get
into such a fix?

     It's useless to make any explanation other than that accident.
will happen in the best of families. And it's better to keep
yourself in a position where no explanations are necessary.

     Think it over pretty carefully before you tell your future
husband about it. He might think you didn't want children at all.
He might believe you had been pretty wild in your youth. It's
terribly easy to misunderstand these things and sometimes words
make them worse.

     When you go home, ask your doctor about birth-control
information and stick to what he says. Don't change around because
some woman dishes out a lot of "absolutely safe methods." Usually
the more positive the woman, the more inaccurate her information.
I know one woman who discovered a new and pleasant system and
rushed around telling all her friends. She neglected to say that
this system depended on the woman being regular in her periods, and
that it had to be adjusted to her cycle.


                         
                  
                               117

                

     Likewise, what works with one woman may not work with another.
I know girls who get along all right with certain douches and
others who can't risk them. Before any woman convinces you, ask a
doctor.

     I know that you will be irritated when you hear people talking
as if any girl who got into a jam was a fool. But realize that it
is futile for one girl to crusade against the campaign of secrecy,
scandal and disapproval waged by society. If you really feel deeply
about this matter, join an organization for that purpose. I am
annoyed when I hear women say that abortions are cheap and simple
affairs and they are confident that their doctors will help them
out if they need help. But I find it wisest to remain silent.

     Similarly if you really want to give advice adopt a very
impersonal, "several friends of mine," instead of the thin "a
friend of mine" with a mass of details. Be very careful before you
recommend your doctor to anyone. Never give letters of introduction
to him. If you really want to help, make the doctor a personal
visit before you mention his name to the girl.

     If you haven't become one of the initiated, let me give you a
few words of advice. Don't wait and worry if you're overdue. Go
immediately to the doctor, your family doctor. If you are caught,
ask his advice. He may help you, and thus you'll be saved a lot of
additional expense.

     Don't let false modesty keep you from telling your lover about
it and asking his help. Unless he's an absolute rotter, he'll
arrange things. If he is a cad, you want to find it out. And if you
intend to marry him and have children, now is the time to do it.

     I made a mistake in trying to protect my lover, and so I was
accused of being bossy. Don't repeat my error. Let him take as much
responsibility as he is willing to. That will prevent a lot of
resentment later on. Go to him first, before you go to a friend.
Then he'll feel that you trust him and later on you won't quarrel
about that. Furthermore, there's a danger if you go to a man friend
that your lover will feel that perhaps he isn't the father of the
unborn child.

     This sounds pretty disagreeable but it's better than
bitterness and squabbling afterward. If your lover wants to pay all
the expenses, lot him do it. You'll have the suffering to do. But
don't let yourself get to feeling that you are a martyr, that all
men are selfish, and sex is an ugly trap. When you begin to feel
that, look around at some of your friends and remember that you are
only one of thousands of girls with secrets in their eyes and
smiles on their lips.

     Don't degenerate into a whiner because you had one bad break.
But on the other hand, don't make any mistake and try to be too
brave and too gallant. If you do, your lover may think that you
don't take this very seriously and he will dismiss it lightly. Let
him know that you're scared, you are suffering and that you need
gentleness and consideration. Don't be too modern.



                         
                  
                               118

                

     And another thing. This is not the time to skimp on expenses.
Go to the best doctor you can, even if you have to borrow the
money. But don't hesitate to let the doctor know if you're hard up.
If you are staying at a good hotel, are well dressed and don't
mention money, he may charge you more than his minimum price, send
you to an expensive place to stay and give you a more expensive
nurse. Most good doctors charge according to the estimated income
of the patient.

     When you're ready to leave, ask the doctor about any possible
danger from going back to work, when you can have intercourse again
and what to do if something happens. Chances are there will be a
slight flow for perhaps a month. But if you are in pain, rush right
down to a doctor; don't wait and worry.

     Your mind is going to be filled with the subject. So be
careful about drinking. You're not supposed to do much anyhow.
Remember that there is no subject on which there are so many
violent opinions. The woman who talks tolerantly of birth control
and abortions may speak in an entirely different way regarding some
friend or relative.




                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The  is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The  is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.


